The Project Gutenberg eBook of Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 25
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 25

Author: Jean de La Fontaine


        
Release date: March 1, 2004 [eBook #5299]
                Most recently updated: December 28, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/5299

Credits: This eBook was produced by David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 25 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger





                    THE TALES AND NOVELS
                             OF
                     J. DE LA FONTAINE



          Volume 25.

          Contains:
             The Dress-maker
             The Gascon
             The Pitcher
             To Promise is One Thing, to Keep it, Another
             The Nightengale
             Epitaph of Fontaine



                     THE DRESS-MAKER


          A CLOISTERED nun had a lover
          Dwelling in the neighb'ring town;
          Both racked their brains to discover
          How they best their love might crown.
          The swain to pass the convent-door!--
          No easy matter!--Thus they swore,
          And wished it light.--I ne'er knew a nun
          In such a pass to be outdone:--
          In woman's clothes the youth must dress,
          And gain admission. I confess
          The ruse has oft been tried before,
          But it succeeded as of yore.
          Together in a close barred cell
          The lovers were, and sewed all day,
          Nor heeded how time flew away.--
          "What's that I hear? Refection bell!
          "'Tis time to part. Adieu!--Farewell!--
          "How's this?" exclaimed the abbess, "why
          "The last at table?"--"Madam, I
          "Have had my dress-maker."--"The rent
          "On which you've both been so intent
          "Is hard to stop, for the whole day
          "To sew and mend, you made her stay;
          "Much work indeed you've had to do!
          "--Madam, 't would last the whole night through,
          "When in our task we find enjoyment
          "There is no end of the employment."






                    THE GASCON


          I AM always inclined to suspect
             The best story under the sun
          As soon as by chance I detect
             That teller and hero are one.

          We're all of us prone to conceit,
             And like to proclaim our own glory,
          But our purpose we're apt to defeat
             As actors in chief of our story.

          To prove the truth of what I state
          Let me an anecdote relate:
          A Gascon with his comrade sat
          At tavern drinking. This and that
             He vaunted with assertion pat.
             From gasconade to gasconade
             Passed to the conquests he had made
             In love.  A buxom country maid,
          Who served the wine, with due attention
          Lent patient ear to each invention,
             And pressed her hands against her side
             Her bursting merriment to hide.
             To hear our Gascon talk, no Sue
             Nor Poll in town but that he knew;
             With each he'd passed a blissful night
             More to their own than his delight.
             This one he loved for she was fair,
             That for her glossy ebon hair.
          One miss, to tame his cruel rigour,
          Had brought him gifts.--She owned his vigour
             In short it wanted but his gaze
             To set each trembling heart ablaze.
             His strength surpassed his luck,--the test--
          In one short night ten times he'd blessed
             A dame who gratefully expressed
             Her thanks with corresponding zest.
             At this the maid burst forth, "What more?
             "I never heard such lies before!
             "Content were I if at that sport
             "I had what that poor dame was short."






                      THE PITCHER


          THE simple Jane was sent to bring
            Fresh water from the neighb'ring spring;
            The matter pressed, no time to waste,
            Jane took her jug, and ran in haste
          The well to reach, but in her flurry
          (The more the speed the worse the hurry),
            Tripped on a rolling stone, and broke
            Her precious pitcher,--ah! no joke!
            Nay, grave mishap! 'twere better far
            To break her neck than such a jar!
          Her dame would beat and soundly rate her,
          No way could Jane propitiate her.
            Without a sou new jug to buy!
            'Twere better far for her to die!
            O'erwhelmed by grief and cruel fears
            Unhappy Jane burst into tears
            "I can't go home without the delf,"
          Sobbed Jane, "I'd rather kill myself;
            "So here am I resolved to die."
          A friendly neighbour passing by
          O'erheard our damsel's lamentation;
          And kindly offered consolation:
            "If death, sweet maiden, be thy bent,
            "I'll aid thee in thy sad intent."
          Throwing her down, he drew his dirk,
          And plunged it in the maid,--a work
            You'll say was cruel,--not so Jane,
            Who even seemed to like the pain,
            And hoped to be thus stabbed again.
            Amid the weary world's alarms,
            For some e'en death will have its charms;
            "If this, my friend, is how you kill,
            "Of breaking jugs I'll have my fill!"






                  TO PROMISE IS ONE THING
                    TO KEEP IT, ANOTHER


          JOHN courts Perrette; but all in vain;
            Love's sweetest oaths, and tears, and sighs
            All potent spells her heart to gain
            The ardent lover vainly tries:
          Fruitless his arts to make her waver,
          She will not grant the smallest favour:
            A ruse our youth resolved to try
            The cruel air to mollify:--
            Holding his fingers ten outspread
            To Perrette's gaze, and with no dread
            "So often," said he, "can I prove,
            "My sweet Perrette, how warm my love."
            When lover's last avowals fail
          To melt the maiden's coy suspicions
            A lover's sign will oft prevail
          To win the way to soft concessions:
            Half won she takes the tempting bait;
          Smiles on him, draws her lover nearer,
            With heart no longer obdurate
          She teaches him no more to fear her-
            A pinch,--a kiss,--a kindling eye,--
            Her melting glances,--nothing said.--
            John ceases not his suit to ply
            Till his first finger's debt is paid.
            A second, third and fourth he gains,
            Takes breath, and e'en a fifth maintains.
            But who could long such contest wage?
            Not I, although of fitting age,
            Nor John himself, for here he stopped,
            And further effort sudden dropped.
            Perrette, whose appetite increased
            just as her lover's vigour ceased,
          In her fond reckoning defeated,
          Considered she was greatly cheated--
            If duty, well discharged, such blame
            Deserve; for many a highborn dame
            Would be content with such deceit.
            But Perrette, as already told,
            Out of her count, began to scold
            And call poor John an arrant cheat
          For promising and not performing.
          John calmly listened to her storming,
            And well content with work well done,
            Thinking his laurels fairly won,
            Cooly replied, on taking leave:
            "No cause I see to fume and grieve;
            "Or for such trifle to dispute;
            "To promise and to execute
            "Are not the same, be it confessed,
            "Suffice it to have done one's best;
            "With time I'll yet discharge what's due;
            "Meanwhile, my sweet Perrette, adieu!"






                    THE NIGHTINGALE


          NO easy matter 'tis to hold,
          Against its owner's will, the fleece
          Who troubled by the itching smart
          Of Cupid's irritating dart,
          Eager awaits some Jason bold
               To grant release.
          E'en dragon huge, or flaming steer,
          When Jason's loved will cause no fear.

          Duennas, grating, bolt and lock,
            All obstacles can naught avail;
          Constraint is but a stumbling block;
            For youthful ardour must prevail.
          Girls are precocious nowadays,
          Look at the men with ardent gaze,
          And longings' an infinity;
          Trim misses but just in their teens
          By day and night devise the means
          To dull with subtlety to sleep
          The Argus vainly set to keep
            In safety their virginity.
          Sighs, smiles, false tears, they'll fain employ
          An artless lover to decoy.
          I'll say no more, but leave to you,
          Friend reader, to pronounce if true
          What I've asserted when you have heard
          How artful Kitty, caged her bird.

          IN a small town in Italy,
            The name of which I do not know,
            Young Kitty dwelt, gay, pretty, free,
            Varambon's child.--Boccacio
          Omits her mother's name, which not
          To you or me imports a jot.
          At fourteen years our Kitty's charms
          Were all that could be wished--plump arms,
          A swelling bosom; on her cheeks
          Roses' and lilies' mingled streaks,
          A sparkling eye--all these, you know,
            Speak well for what is found below.
            With such advantages as these
            No virgin sure could fail to please,
            Or lack a lover; nor did Kate;
            But little time she had to wait;
            One soon appeared to seal her fate.
          Young Richard saw her, loved her, wooed her--
          What swain I ask could have withstood her?
          Soft words, caresses, tender glances,
          The battery of love's advances,
            Soon lit up in the maiden's breast
            The flame which his own heart possessed,
            Soon growing to a burning fire
            Of love and mutual desire.
            Desire for what?  My reader knows,
            Or if he does not may suppose,
            And not be very wond'rous wise.
            When youthful lovers mingle sighs,
            Believe me, friend, I am not wrong,
            For one thing only do they long.
            One check deferred our lover's bliss,
            A thing quite natural, 'twas this:
            The mother loved so well her child
            That, fearful she might be beguiled,
            She would not let her out of sight,
            A single minute, day or night.
          At mother's apron string all day
          Kate whiled the weary hours away,
          And shared her bed all night. Such love
          In parents we must all approve,
          Though Catherine, I must confess,
          In place of so much tenderness
          More liberty would have preferred.
            To little girls maternal care
            In such excess is right and fair,
            But for a lass of fourteen years,
            For whom one need have no such fears,
          Solicitude is quite absurd,
          And only bores her. Kitty could
          No moment steal, do what she would,
          To see her Richard. Sorely vexed
          She was, and he still more perplexed.
          In spite of all he might devise
          A squeeze, a kiss, quick talk of eyes
          Was all he could obtain, no more.
          Bread butterless, a sanded floor,
          It seemed no better. Joy like this
          Could not suffice, more sterling bliss
          Our lovers wished, nor would stop short
          Till they'd obtained the thing they sought.
          And thus it came about.  One day
          By chance they met, alone, away
          From jealous parents.  "What's the use;"
          Said Richard, "of all our affection?
            "Of love it is a rank abuse,
            "And yields me nothing but dejection
            "I see you without seeing you,
            "Must always look another way,
            "And if we meet I dare not stay,
            "Must ev'ry inclination smother.
            "I can't believe your love is true;
            "I'll never own you really kind
            "Unless some certain means you find
            "For us to meet without your mother."
          Kate answered: "Were it not too plain
            "How warm my love, another strain
            "I would employ.  In converse vain
            "Let us not waste our moments few;
            "But think what it were best to do."
            "If you will please me," Robert said,
            "You must contrive to change your bed,
            "And have it placed--well, let me see--
            "Moved to the outer gallery,
            "Where you will be alone and free.
            "We there can meet and chat at leisure
            "While others sleep, nor need we fear,
            "Of merry tales I have a treasure
            "To tell, but cannot tell them here."
          Kate smiled at this for she knew well
          What sort of tales he had to tell;
          But promised she would do her best
          And soon accomplish his request.
          It was not easy, you'll admit,
          But love lends foolish maidens wit;
          And this is how she managed it.
          The whole night long she kept awake,
            Snored, sighed and kicked, as one possessed,
            That parents both could get not rest,
          So much she made the settle shake.
          This is not strange.  A longing girl,
            With thoughts of sweetheart in her head,
          In bed all night will sleepless twirl.
            A flea is in her ear, 'tis said.
          The morning broke.  Of fleas and heat
          Kitty complained.  "Let me entreat,
            "O mother, I may put my bed
            "Out in the gallery," she said,
            "'Tis cooler there, and Philomel
            "Who warbles in the neigh'bring dell
            "Will solace me." Ready consent
          The simple mother gave, and went
          To seek her spouse. "Our Kate, my dear,
            "Will change her bed that she may hear
            "The nightingale, and sleep more cool."
            "Wife," said the good man, "You're a fool,
            "And Kate too with her nightingale;
            "Don't tell me such a foolish tale.
            "She must remain.  No doubt to-night
            "Will fresher be.  I sleep all right
            "In spite of heat, and so can she.
            "Is she more delicate than me?"
          Incensed was Kate by this denial
          After so promising a trial,
          Nor would be beat, but firmly swore
          To give more trouble than before.
          That night again no wink she slept
          But groaned and fretted, sighed and wept,
          Upon her couch so tossed and turned,
          The anxious mother quite concerned
          Again her husband sought.  "Our Kate
            "To me seems greatly changed of late.
            "You are unkind," she said to him,
            "To thwart her simple, girlish whim.
            "Why may she not her bed exchange,
            "In naught will it the house derange?
            "Placed in the passage she's as near
            "To us as were she lying here.
            "You do not love your child, and will
            "With your unkindness make her ill."
            "Pray cease," the husband cried, "to scold
            "And take your whim.  I ne'er could hold
            "My own against a screaming wife;
            "You'll drive me mad, upon my life.
            "Her belly-full our Kate may get
            "Of nightingale or of linnet."
          The thing was settled.  Kate obeyed,
          And in a trice her bed was made,
          And lover signalled.  Who shall say
          How long to both appeared that day,
          That tedious day!  But night arrived
          And Richard too; he had contrived
          By ladder, and a servant's aid,
          To reach the chamber of the maid.
          To tell how often they embraced,
            How changed in form their tenderness,
          Would lead to nothing but a waste
            Of time, my readers will confess.
          The longest, most abstruse discourse
          Would lack precision, want the force
          Their youthful ardour to portray.
          To understand there's but one way--
          Experience.  The nightingale
          Sang all night long his pleasing tale,
          And though he made but little noise,
          The lass was satisfied.  Her joys
          So exquisite that she averred
          The other nightingale, the bird
          Who warbles to the woods his bliss,
          Was but an ass compared with this.
          But nature could not long maintain
          Of efforts such as these the strain;
          Their forces spent, the lovers twain
          In fond embrace fell fast asleep
          Just as the dawn began to peep:
          The father as he left his bed
          By curiosity was led
          To learn if Kitty soundly slept,
          And softly to the passage crept.
            "I'll see the influence," he said,
            "Of nightingale and change of bed."
          With bated breath, upon tip toes,
          Close to the couch he cautious goes
          Where Kitty lay in calm repose.
          Excessive heat had made all clothes
          Unbearable.  The sleeping pair
          Had cast them off, and lay as bare
          As our first happy parents were
          In Paradise.  But in the place
            Of apple, in her willing hand
            Kate firmly grasp the magic wand
          Which served to found the human race,
          The which to name were a disgrace,
          Though dames the most refined employ it;
          Desire it, and much enjoy it,
          If good Catullus tells us true.
          The father scarce believed his view,
          But keeping in his bosom pent
          His anger, to his wife he went,
          And said, "Get up, and come with me.
            "At present I can plainly see
            "Why Kate had such anxiety
            "To hear the nightingale, for she
            "To catch the bird so well has planned
            "That now she holds him in her hand."
          The mother almost wept for glee.
            "A nightingale, oh! let me see.
            "How large is he, and can he sing,
            "And will he breed, the pretty thing?
            "How did she catch him, clever child?"
          Despite his grief the good man smiled.
            "Much more than you expect you'll see.
            "But hold your tongue, and come with me;
            "For if your chattering is heard,
            "Away will fly the timid bird;
            "And you will spoil our daughter's game."
          Who was surprised?  It was the dame.
          Her anger burst into a flame
          As she the nightingale espied
          Which Kitty held; she could have cried,
          And scolded, called her nasty slut,
          And brazen hussey, bitch, and--but
          Her husband stopped her. "What's the use
            "Of all your scolding and abuse?
            "The mischief's done, in vain may you
            "From now till doomsday fret and stew,
            "Misfortune done you can't undo,
            "But something may be done to mend:
            "For notary this instant send,
            "Bid holy priest and mayor attend.
            "For their good offices I wait
            "To set this nasty matter straight."
          As he discoursed, Richard awoke,
          And seeing that the sun had broke,
          These troubled words to Kitty spoke
            "Alas, my love, 'tis broad day light,
            "How can I now effect my flight?"
            "All will go well," rejoined the sire,
            "I will not grumble, my just ire
            "Were useless here; you have committed
            "A wrong of which to be acquitted,
            "Richard, there is one only way,
            "My child you wed without delay.
            "She's well brought up, young, full of health
            "If fortune has not granted wealth,
            "Her beauty you do not deny,
            "So wed her, or prepare to die."
          To hesitate in such a case
          Would surely have been out of place
          The girl he loved to take to wife,
          Or in his prime to lose his life,
          The point in truth needs no debate,
          Nor did our Richard hesitate.
          Besides, the most supreme delight
          Of life he'd tasted one short night,
          But one, in lovely Kitty's arms;
          Could he so soon resign her charms!
          While Richard, pleased with his escape
          From what he feared an awkward scrape,
          Was dreaming of his happy choice,
          Our Kitty, by her father's voice
          Awakened, from her hand let go
          The cause of all her joy and woe,
          And round her naked beauties wound
          The sheet picked up from off the ground:
          Meanwhile the notary appears
          To put an end to all their fears.
          They wrote, they signed, the sealed--and thus
          The wedding ended free from fuss.
          They left the happy couple there.
          His satisfaction to declare,
          Thus spoke their father to the pair:
            "Take courage, children, have no care;
            "The nightingale in cage is pent,
            "May sing now to his heart's content."






                 EPITAPH OF LA FONTAINE
                    MADE BY HIMSELF


          JOHN, as he came, so went away,
            Consuming capital and pay,
            Holding superfluous riches cheap;
          The trick of spending time he knew,
          Dividing it in portions two,
            For idling one, and one for sleep.


          THE END.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 25 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


