The Project Gutenberg eBook of Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 02
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 02

Author: Jean de La Fontaine


        
Release date: March 1, 2004 [eBook #5276]
                Most recently updated: December 28, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/5276

Credits: This eBook was produced by David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 02 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





                       THE TALES AND NOVELS
                                OF
                        J. DE LA FONTAINE



          Volume 2.

          Contents:
             The Cudgelled and Contented Cuckold
             The Husband Confessor
             The Cobbler
             The Peasant and His Angry Lord



                       THE CUDGELLED AND
                       CONTENTED CUCKOLD


          SOME time ago from Rome, in smart array,
          A younger brother homeward bent his way,
          Not much improved, as frequently the case
          With those who travel to that famous place.
          Upon the road oft finding, where he stayed,
          Delightful wines, and handsome belle or maid,
          With careless ease he loitered up and down.--
          One day there passed him in a country town,
          Attended by a page, a lady fair,
          Whose charming form and all-engaging air,
          At once his bosom fired with fond desire;
          And nearer still, her beauties to admire.
          He most gallantly saw her safely home;
          Attentions charm the sex where'er we roam.

          OUR thoughtless rambler pleasures always sought:
          From Rome this spark had num'rous pardons brought;
          But,--as to virtues (this too oft we find),
          He'd left them,--with his HOLINESS behind!

          THE lady was, by ev'ry one, confessed,
          Of beauty, youth, and elegance possessed;
          She wanted naught to form her bliss below,
          But one whose love would ever fondly flow.

          INDEED so fickle proved this giddy youth,
          That nothing long would please his heart or tooth;
          Howe'er he earnestly inquired her name,
          And ev'ry other circumstance the same.
          She's lady, they replied, to great 'squire Good,
          Who's almost bald from age 'tis understood;
          But as he's rich, and high in rank appears,
          Why that's a recompense you know for years.

          THESE facts our young gallant no sooner gained,
          But ardent hopes at once he entertained;
          To wily plots his mind he quickly bent,
          And to a neighb'ring town his servants sent;
          Then, at the house where dwelled our noble 'squire,
          His humble services proposed for hire.

          PRETENDING ev'ry sort of work he knew,
          He soon a fav'rite with old Square-toes grew,
          Who (first advising with his charming mate),
          Chief falc'ner made him o'er his fine estate.

          THE new domestick much the lady pleased;
          He watched and eagerly the moment seized,
          His ardent passion boldly to declare,
          In which he showed a novice had no share.

          'TWAS managed well, for nothing but the chase,
          Could Square-toes tempt to quit her fond embrace,
          And then our falc'ner must his steps attend:--
          The very time he wished at home to spend.
          The lady similar emotions showed;
          For opportunity their bosoms glowed;
          And who will feel in argument so bold,
          When this I say, the contrary to hold?
          At length with pity Cupid saw the case,
          And kindly lent his aid to their embrace.

          ONE night the lady said, with eager eyes,
          My dear, among our servants, which d'ye prize,
          For moral conduct most and upright heart?
          To this her spouse replied, the faithful part
          Is with the falc'ner found, I must decide:
          To him my life I'd readily confide.

          THEN you are wrong, said she,--most truly so,
          For he's a good-for-nothing wretch I know;
          You'll scarcely credit it, but t'other day,
          He had the barefaced impudence to say,
          He loved me much, and then his passion pressed:
          I'd nearly fallen, I was so distressed.
          To tear his eyes out, I designed at first,
          And e'en to choke this wretch, of knaves the worst;
          By prudence solely was I then restrained,
          For fear the world should think his point was gained.

          THE better then to prove his dark intent,
          I feigned an inclination to consent,
          And in the garden, promised as to-night,
          I'd near the pear-tree meet this roguish wight.
          Said I, my husband never moves from hence;
          No jealous fancy, but to show the sense
          He entertains of my pure, virtuous life,
          And fond affection for a loving wife.
          Thus circumstanced, your wishes see are vain,
          Unless when he's asleep a march I gain,
          And softly stealing from his torpid side,
          With trembling steps I, to my lover, glide.
          So things remain, my dear; an odd affair:--
          On this Square-toes 'gan to curse and swear;
          But his fond rib most earnestly besought,
          His rage to stifle, as she clearly thought,
          He might in person, if he'd take the pain,
          Secure the rascal and redress obtain
          You know, said she, the tree is near the door,
          Upon the left and bears of fruit great store;
          But if I may my sentiments express,
          In cap and petticoats you'd best to dress;
          His insolence is great, and you'll be right,
          To give your strokes with double force to night;
          Well work his back; flat lay him on the ground:--
          A rascal! honourable ladies round,
          No doubt he many times has served the same;
          'Tis such impostors characters defame.
          To rouse his wrath the story quite sufficed;
          The spouse resolved to do as she advised.
          Howe'er to dupe him was an easy lot;
          The hour arrived, his dress he soon had got,
          Away he ran with anxious fond delight.
          In hopes the wily spark to trap that night.
          But no one there our easy fool could see,
          And while he waited near the fav'rite tree,
          Half dead with cold, the falc'ner slyly stole,
          To her who had so well contrived the whole;
          Time, place, and disposition, all combined
          The loving pair to mutual joys resigned.
          When our expert gallant had with the dame,
          An hour or more indulged his ardent flame,
          Though forced at length to quit the loving lass,
          'Twas not without the favourite parting glass;
          He then the garden sought, where long the 'squire,
          Upon the knave had wished to vent his ire.

          NO sooner he the silly husband spied,
          But feigning 'twas the wily wife he eyed,
          At once he cried,--ah, vilest of the sex!
          Are these thy tricks, so good a man to vex?
          Oh shame upon thee! thus to treat his love,
          As pure as snow, descending from above.
          I could not think thou hadst so base a heart,
          But clear it is, thou need'st a friendly part,
          And that I'll act: I asked this rendezvous
          With full intent to see if thou wert true;
          And, God be praised, without a loose design,
          To plunge in luxuries pronounced divine.
          Protect me Heav'n! poor sinner that I'm here!
          To guard thy honour I will persevere.
          My worthy master could I thus disgrace?
          Thou wanton baggage with unblushing face,
          Thee on the spot I'll instantly chastise,
          And then thy husband of the fact advise.

          THE fierce harangue o'er Square-toes pleasure spread,
          Who, mutt'ring 'tween his teeth, with fervour said:
          O gracious Lord! to thee my thanks are due--
          To have a wife so chaste--a man so true!
          But presently he felt upon his back
          The falc'ner's cudgel vigorously thwack,
          Who soundly basted him as on he ran,
          To gain the house, with terror, pale and wan.

          THE squire had wished his trusty man, no doubt,
          Had not, at cudgelling, been quite so stout;
          But since he showed himself so true a friend,
          And with his actions could such prudence blend,
          The master fully pardoned what he knew,
          And quickly to his wife in bed he flew,
          When he related every thing that passed
          Were we, cried he, a hundred years to last,
          My lovely dear, we ne'er on earth could find
          A man so faithful, and so well inclined.
          I'd have him take within our town a wife,
          And you and I'll regard him during life.
          In that, replied the lady, we agree,
          And heartily thereto I pledged will be.






                     THE HUSBAND-CONFESSOR


          WHEN Francis (named the first) o'er Frenchmen reign'd,
          In Italy young Arthur laurels gained,
          And oft such daring valour showed in fight,
          With ev'ry honour he was made a knight;
          The monarch placed the spur upon his heel,
          That all around his proper worth might feel.
          Then household deities at home he sought,
          Where--not at prayers his beauteous dame he caught:
          He'd left her, truly, quite dissolv'd in tears;
          But now the belle had bid adieu to fears;
          And oft was dancing joyously around,
          With all the company that could be found.

          GALLANTS in crowds Sir Arthur soon perceived;
          At sight of these the knight was sorely grieved;
          And, turning in his mind how best to act;
          Cried he, Can this be truly held a fact,
          That I've been worthy while I'd fame in view,
          Of cuckoldom at home, and knighthood too?
          It ought to be but half:--the truth let's know;
          From constancy the purest blessings flow.
          Then like a father-confessor he dressed,
          And took his seat where priests their flock confessed.
          His lady absolution sought that day,
          And on her knees before him 'gan to pray;
          The minor sins were told with downcast eyes,
          And then for hearing those of larger size,
          The husband-confessor prepared his ears:--
          Said she, Good father, ('mid a flood of tears),
          My bed receives, (the fault I fear's not slight,)
          A gentleman, a parson, and a knight.
          Still more had followed, but, by rage o'ercome,
          Sir Arthur cut the thread, and she was mum;
          Though, doubtless, had the fair been let proceed,
          Quite long her Litany had been decreed.

          THe husband, in a rage, exclaimed, thou jade,
          A parson, say'st thou? t'whom dost think thou'st made
          This curst confession?--To my spouse, cried she,
          I saw you enter here, and came with glee,
          Supposing you'd a trick to raise surprise;
          Howe'er 'tis strange that one so very wise,
          The riddle should not fully comprehend:--
          A KNIGHT, the king created you, my friend;
          A GENTLEMAN, your rank was long ago;
          A PARSON, you have made yourself you know.
          Goon heav'ns! exclaimed the knight, 'tis very clear,
          And I a blockhead surely must appear.






                          THE COBBLER


          WE'RE told, that once a cobbler, BLASE by name;
          A wife had got, whose charms so high in fame;
          But as it happened, that their cash was spent,
          The honest couple to a neighbour went,
          A corn-factor by trade, not overwise
          To whom they stated facts without disguise;
          And begged, with falt'ring voice denoting care,
          That he, of wheat, would half a measure spare,
          Upon their note, which readily he gave,
          And all advantages desired to wave.

          THE time for payment came; the money used;
          The cash our factor would not be refused;
          Of writs he talked, attorneys, and distress;
          The reason:--heav'n can tell, and you may guess;
          In short, 'twas clear our gay gallant desired,
          To cheer the wife, whose beauty all admired.

          SAID he, what anxiously I wish to get,
          You've plenty stored, and never wanted yet;
          You surely know my meaning?--Yes, she cried;
          I'll turn it in my mind, and we'll decide
          How best to act.    Away she quickly flew,
          And Blase informed, what Ninny had in view.
          Zounds! said the cobbler, we must see, my dear,
          To hook this little sum:--the way is clear;
          No risk I'm confident; for prithee run
          And tell him I've a journey just begun;
          That he may hither come and have his will;
          But 'ere he touch thy lips, demand the bill;
          He'll not refuse the boon I'm very sure;
          Meantime, myself I'll hide and all secure.
          The note obtained, cough loudly, strong, and clear;
          Twice let it be, that I may plainly hear;
          Then forth I'll sally from my lurking place,
          And, spite of folly's frowns, prevent disgrace.

          THE, plot succeeded as the pair desired;
          The cobbler laughed, and ALL his scheme admired:

          A purse-proud cit thereon observed and swore;
          'Twere better to have coughed when all was o'er;
          Then you, all three, would have enjoyed your wish,
          And been in future all as mute as fish.

          OH! sir, replied the cobbler's wife at ease,
          Do you suppose that use can hope to please,
          And like your ladies full of sense appear?
          (For two were seated with his wedded dear;)
          Perhaps my lady 'd act as you describe,
          But ev'ry one such prudence don't imbibe.







                 THE PEASANT AND HIS ANGRY LORD


          ONCE on a time, as hist'ry's page relates,
          A lord, possessed of many large estates,
          Was angry with a poor and humble clod,
          Who tilled his grounds and feared his very nod.
          Th' offence (as often happens) was but small,
          But on him, vowed the peer, his rage should fall--
          Said he, a halter, rascal, you deserve;
          You'll never from the gallows-turnpike swerve:
          Or, soon or late you swinging will be found
          Who, born for hanging, ever yet was drowned?
          Howe'er you'll smile to hear my lenient voice;
          Observe, three punishments await your choice;
          Take which you will.--The first is, you shall eat,
          Of strongest garlick, thirty heads complete;
          No drink you'll have between, nor sleep, nor rest;
          You know a breach of promise I detest.
          Or, on your shoulders further I propose,
          To give you, with a cudgel, thirty blows.
          Or, if more pleasing, that you truly pay,
          The sum of thirty pounds without delay.

          THE peasant 'gan to turn things in his mind:--
          Said he, to take the heads I'm not inclined;
          No drink, you say, between; that makes it worse;
          To eat the garlick thus, would prove a curse.
          Nor can I suffer on my tender back,
          That, with a cudgel, thirty blows you thwack.
          Still harder thirty pounds to pay appeared;
          Uncertain how to act, he hanging feared.
          The noble peer he begged, upon his knees,
          His penitence to hear, and sentence ease.
          But mercy dwelled not with the angry lord
          Is this, cried he, the answer?--bring a cord.
          The peasant, trembling lest his life was sought;
          The garlick chose, which presently was brought.

          UPON a dish my lord the number told;
          Clod no way liked the garlick to behold.
          With piteous mien the garlick head he took,
          Then on it num'rous ways was led to look,
          And grumbling much, began to spit and eat,
          just like a cat with mustard on her meat,
          To touch it with his tongue he durst not do;
          He knew not how to act or what pursue.
          The peer, delighted at the man's distress,
          The garlick made him bite, and chew, and press,
          Then gulp it down as if delicious fare;
          The first he passed; the second made him swear;
          The third he found was every whit as sad,
          He wished the devil had it, 'twas so bad.
          In short, when at the twelfth our wight arrived,
          He thought his mouth and throat of skin deprived.
          Said he, some drink I earnestly intreat;
          What, Greg'ry, cried my lord, dost feel a heat;
          In thy repasts dost love to wet thy jaws?
          Well! well! I won't object; thou know'st my laws;
          Much good may't do thee; here, some wine, some wine!
          Yet recollect, to drink, since you design,
          That afterward, my friend, you'll have to choose
          The thirty blows, or thirty pounds to lose.
          But, cried the peasant, I sincerely pray,
          Your lordship's goodness, that the garlick may
          Be taken in the account, for as to pelf,
          Where can an humble lab'rer, like myself,
          Expect the sum of thirty pounds to seize?
          Then, said the peer, be cudgelled if you please;
          Take thirty thwacks; for naught the garlick goes.
          To moisten well his throat, and ease his woes,
          The peasant drank a copious draught of wine,
          And then to bear the cudgel would resign.

          A SINGLE blow he patiently endured;
          The second, howsoe'er, his patience cured;
          The third was more severe, and each was worse;
          The punishment he now began to curse;
          Two lusty wights, with cudgels thrashed his back
          And regularly gave him thwack and thwack;
          He cried, he roared, for grace he begged his lord,
          Who marked each blow, and would no ease accord;
          But carefully observed, from time to time,
          That lenity he always thought sublime;
          His gravity preserved; considered too
          The blows received and what continued due.

          AT length, when Greg'ry twenty strokes had got,
          He piteously exclaimed:--if more's my lot
          I never shall survive! Oh! pray forgive,
          If you desire, my lord, that I should live.
          Then down with thirty pounds, replied the peer,
          Since you the blows so much pretend to fear;
          I'm sorry for you; but if all the gold
          Be not prepared, your godfather, I'm told,
          Can lend a part; yet, since so far you've been,
          To flinch the rest you surely won't be seen.

          THE wretched peasant to his lordship flew,
          And trembling cried--'tis up! the number view!
          A scrutiny was made, which nothing gained;
          No choice but pay the money now remained;
          This grieved him much, and o'er the fellow's face;
          The dewy drops were seen to flow apace.
          All useless proved:--the full demand he sent,
          With which the peer expressed himself content.
          Unlucky he whoe'er his lord offends!
          To golden ore, howe'er, the proud man bends:

          'TWAS vain that Gregory a pardon prayed;
          For trivial faults the peasant dearly paid;
          His throat enflamed--his tender back well beat--
          His money gone--and all to make complete,
          Without the least deduction for the pain,
          The blows and garlick gave the trembling swain.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Who, born for hanging, ever yet was drowned?







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 02 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


