The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Tales and Novels, v9: Belphegor and Others
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Tales and Novels, v9: Belphegor and Others

Author: Jean de La Fontaine


        
Release date: March 1, 2004 [eBook #5282]
                Most recently updated: December 28, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/5282

Credits: This eBook was produced by David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALES AND NOVELS, V9: BELPHEGOR AND OTHERS ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





                     THE TALES AND NOVELS
                              OF
                      J. DE LA FONTAINE



          Volume 9.

          Contains:
            Belphegor
            The Little Bell
            The Glutton]



                          BELPHEGOR
                ADDRESSED TO MISS DE CHAMMELAY


          YOUR name with ev'ry pleasure here I place,
          The last effusions of my muse to grace.
          O charming Phillis! may the same extend
          Through time's dark night: our praise together blend;
          To this we surely may pretend to aim
          Your acting and my rhymes attention claim.
          Long, long in mem'ry's page your fame shall live;
          You, who such ecstacy so often give;
          O'er minds, o'er hearts triumphantly you reign:
          In Berenice, in Phaedra, and Chimene,
          Your tears and plaintive accents all engage:
          Beyond compare in proud Camilla's rage;
          Your voice and manner auditors delight;
          Who strong emotions can so well excite?
          No fine eulogium from my pen expect:
          With you each air and grace appear correct
          My first of Phillis's you ought to be;
          My sole affection had been placed on thee;
          Long since, had I presumed the truth to tell;
          But he who loves would fain be loved as well.

          NO hope of gaining such a charming fair,
          Too soon, perhaps, I ceded to despair;
          Your friend, was all I ventured to be thought,
          Though in your net I more than half was caught.
          Most willingly your lover I'd have been;
          But time it is our story should be seen.

          ONE, day, old Satan, sov'reign dread of hell;
          Reviewed his subjects, as our hist'ries tell;
          The diff'rent ranks, confounded as they stood,
          Kings, nobles, females, and plebeian blood,
          Such grief expressed, and made such horrid cries,
          As almost stunned, and filled him with surprise.
          The monarch, as he passed, desired to know
          The cause that sent each shade to realms below.
          Some said--my HUSBAND; others WIFE replied;
          The same was echoed loud from ev'ry side.

          His majesty on this was heard to say:
          If truth these shadows to my ears convey,
          With ease our glory we may now augment:
          I'm fully bent to try th' experiment.
          With this design we must some demon send,
          Who wily art with prudence well can blend;
          And, not content with watching Hymen's flock,
          Must add his own experience to the stock.

          THE sable senate instantly approved
          The proposition that the monarch moved;
          Belphegor was to execute the work;
          The proper talent in him seemed to lurk:
          All ears and eyes, a prying knave in grain
          In short, the very thing they wished to gain.

          THAT he might all expense and cost defray,
          They gave him num'rous bills without delay,
          And credit too, in ev'ry place of note,
          With various things that might their plan promote.
          He was, besides, the human lot to fill,
          Of pleasure and of pain:--of good and ill;
          In fact, whate'er for mortals was designed,
          With his legation was to be combined.
          He might by industry and wily art,
          His own afflictions dissipate in part;
          But die he could not, nor his country see,
          Till he ten years complete on earth should be.

          BEHOLD him trav'lling o'er th' extensive space;
          Between the realms of darkness and our race.
          To pass it, scarcely he a moment took;
          On Florence instantly he cast a look;--
          Delighted with the beauty of the spot,
          He there resolved to fix his earthly lot,
          Regarding it as proper for his wiles,
          A city famed for wanton freaks and guiles.
          Belphegor soon a noble mansion hired,
          And furnished it with ev'ry thing desired;
          As signor Roderick he designed to pass;
          His equipage was large of ev'ry class;
          Expense anticipating day by day,
          What, in ten years, he had to throw away.

          HIS noble entertainments raised surprise;
          Magnificence alone would not suffice;
          Delightful pleasures he dispensed around,
          And flattery abundantly was found,
          An art in which a demon should excel:
          No devil surely e'er was liked so well.
          His heart was soon the object of the FAIR;
          To please Belphegor was their constant care.

          WHO lib'rally with presents smoothes the road,
          Will meet no obstacles to LOVE'S abode.
          In ev'ry situation they are sweet,
          I've often said, and now the same repeat:
          The primum mobile of human kind,
          Are gold and silver, through the world we find.

          OUR envoy kept two books, in which he wrote
          The names of all the married pairs of note;
          But that assigned to couples satisfied,
          He scarcely for it could a name provide,
          Which made the demon almost blush to see,
          How few, alas! in wedlock's chains agree;
          While presently the other, which contained
          Th' unhappy--not a leaf in blank remained.

          No other choice Belphegor now had got,
          Than--try himself the hymeneal knot.
          In Florence he beheld a certain fair,
          With charming face and smart engaging air;
          Of noble birth, but puffed with empty pride;
          Some marks of virtue, though not much beside.
          For Roderick was asked this lofty dame;
          The father said Honesta* (such her name)
          Had many eligible offers found;
          But, 'mong the num'rous band that hovered round,
          Perhaps his daughter, Rod'rick's suit might take,
          Though he should wish for time the choice to make.
          This approbation met, and Rod'rick 'gan
          To use his arts and execute his plan.

          THE entertainments, balls, and serenades,
          Plays, concerts, presents, feasts, and masquerades,
          Much lessened what the demon with him brought;
          He nothing grudged:--whate'er was wished he bought.
          The dame believed high honour she bestowed,
          When she attention to his offer showed;
          And, after prayers, entreaties, and the rest,
          To be his wife she full assent expressed.

          BUT first a pettifogger to him came,
          Of whom (aside) Belphegor made a game;
          What! said the demon, is a lady gained
          just like a house?--these scoundrels have obtained
          Such pow'r and sway, without them nothing's done;
          But hell will get them when their course is run.
          He reasoned properly; when faith's no more,
          True honesty is forced to leave the door;
          When men with confidence no longer view
          Their fellow-mortals,--happiness adieu!
          The very means we use t' escape the snare,
          Oft deeper plunge us in the gulph of care;
          Avoid attorneys, if you comfort crave
          Who knows a PETTIFOGGER, knows a KNAVE;
          Their contracts, filled with IFS and FORS, appear
          The gate through which STRIFE found admittance here.
          In vain we hope again the earth 'twill leave
          Still STRIFE remains, and we ourselves deceive:
          In spite of solemn forms and laws we see,
          That LOVE and HYMEN often disagree.
          The heart alone can tranquilize the mind;
          In mutual passion ev'ry bliss we find.

          HOW diff'rent things in other states appear!
          With friends--'tis who can be the most sincere;
          With lovers--all is sweetness, balm of life;
          While all is IRKSOMENESS with man and wife.
          We daily see from DUTY springs disgust,
          And PLEASURE likes true LIBERTY to trust.

          ARE happy marriages for ever flown?
          On full consideration I will own,
          That when each other's follies couples bear;
          They then deserve the name of HAPPY PAIR.

          ENOUGH of this:--no sooner had our wight
          The belle possessed, and passed the month's delight;
          But he perceived what marriage must be here,
          With such a demon in our nether sphere.
          For ever jars and discords rang around;
          Of follies, ev'ry class our couple found;
          Honesta often times such noise would make,
          Her screams and cries the neighbours kept awake,
          Who, running thither, by the wife were told:--
          Some paltry tradesman's daughter, coarse and bold,
          He should have had:--not one of rank like me;
          To treat me thus, what villain he must be!
          A wife so virtuous, could he e'er deserve!
          My scruples are too great, or I should swerve;
          Indeed, without dispute, 'twould serve him right:--
          We are not sure she nothing did in spite;
          These prudes can make us credit what they please:
          Few ponder long when they can dupe with ease.

          THIS wife and husband, as our hist'ries say,
          Each moment squabbled through the passing day;
          Their disagreements often would arise
          About a petticoat, cards, tables, pies,
          Gowns, chairs, dice, summer-houses, in a word,
          Things most ridiculous and quite absurd.

          WELL might this spouse regret his Hell profound,
          When he considered what he'd met on ground.
          To make our demon's wretchedness complete,
          Honesta's relatives, from ev'ry street,
          He seemed to marry, since he daily fed
          The father, mother, sister (fit to wed,)
          And little brother, whom he sent to school;
          While MISS he portioned to a wealthy fool.

          His utter ruin, howsoe'er, arose
          From his attorney-steward that he chose.
          What's that? you ask--a wily sneaking knave,
          Who, while his master spends, contrives to save;
          Till, in the end, grown rich, the lands he buys,
          Which his good lord is forced to sacrifice.

          IF, in the course of time, the master take
          The place of steward, and his fortune make,
          'Twould only to their proper rank restore,
          Those who become just what they were before.

          POOR Rod'rick now no other hope had got,
          Than what the chance of traffick might allot;
          Illusion vain, or doubtful at the best:--
          Though some grow rich, yet all are not so blessed.
          'Twas said our husband never would succeed;
          And truly, such it seemed to be decreed.
          His agents (similar to those we see
          In modern days) were with his treasure free;
          His ships were wrecked; his commerce came to naught;
          Deceived by knaves, of whom he well had thought;
          Obliged to borrow money, which to pay,
          He was unable at th' appointed day,
          He fled, and with a farmer shelter took,
          Where he might hope the bailiffs would not look.

          HE told to Matthew, (such the farmer's name,)
          His situation, character, and fame:
          By duns assailed, and harassed by a wife,
          Who proved the very torment of his life,
          He knew no place of safety to obtain,
          Like ent'ring other bodies, where 'twas plain,
          He might escape the catchpole's prowling eye,
          Honesta's wrath, and all her rage defy.
          From these he promised he would thrice retire;
          Whenever Matthew should the same desire:
          Thrice, but no more, t'oblige this worthy man,
          Who shelter gave when from the fiends he ran.

          THE AMBASSADOR commenced his form to change:--
          From human frame to frame he 'gan to range;
          But what became his own fantastick state,
          Our books are silent, nor the facts relate.

          AN only daughter was the first he seized,
          Whose charms corporeal much our demon pleased;
          But Matthew, for a handsome sum of gold,
          Obliged him, at a word, to quit his hold.
          This passed at Naples--next to Rome he came,
          Where, with another fair, he did the same;
          But still the farmer banished him again,
          So well he could the devil's will restrain;
          Another weighty purse to him was paid
          Thrice Matthew drove him out from belle and maid.

          THE king of Naples had a daughter fair,
          Admired, adored:--her parents' darling care;
          In wedlock oft by many princes sought;
          Within her form, the wily demon thought
          He might be sheltered from Honesta's rage;
          And none to drive him thence would dare engage.

          NAUGHT else was talked of, in or out of town,
          But devils driven by the cunning clown;
          Large sums were offered, if, by any art,
          He'd make the demon from the fair depart.

          AFFLICTED much was Matthew, now to lose
          The gold thus tendered, but he could not choose,
          For since Belphegor had obliged him thrice,
          He durst not hope the demon to entice;
          Poor man was he, a sinner, who, by chance,
          (He knew not how, it surely was romance,)
          Had some few devils, truly, driven out:
          Most worthy of contempt without a doubt.
          But all in vain:--the man they took by force;
          Proceed he must, or hanged he'd be of course.

          THE demon was before our farmer placed;
          The sight was by the prince in person graced;
          The wond'rous contest numbers ran to see,
          And all the world spectators fain would be.

          IF vanquished by the devil:--he must swing;
          If vanquisher:--'twould thousands to him bring:
          The gallows was, no doubt, a horrid view;
          Yet, at the purse, his glances often flew;
          The evil spirit laughed within his sleeve,
          To see the farmer tremble, fret, and grieve.
          He pleaded that the wight he'd thrice obeyed;
          The demon was by Matthew often prayed;
          But all in vain,--the more he terror showed,
          The more Belphegor ridicule bestowed.

          AT length the clown was driven to declare,
          The fiend he was unable to ensnare;
          Away they Matthew to the gallows led;
          But as he went, it entered in his head,
          And, in a sort of whisper he averred
          (As was in fact the case) a drum he heard.

          THE demon, with surprise, to Matthew cried;
          What noise is that? Honesta, he replied,
          Who you demands, and every where pursues,
          The spouse who treats her with such vile abuse.

          THESE words were thunder to Belphegor's ears,
          Who instantly took flight, so great his fears;
          To hell's abyss he fled without delay,
          To tell adventures through the realms of day.
          Sire, said the demon, it is clearly true,
          Damnation does the marriage knot pursue.
          Your highness often hither sees arrive,
          Not squads, but regiments, who, when alive,
          By Hymen were indissolubly tied:--
          In person I the fact have fully tried.
          Th' institution, perhaps, most just could be:
          Past ages far more happiness might see;
          But ev'ry thing, with time, corruption shows;
          No jewel in your crown more lustre throws.

          BELPHEGOR'S tale by Satan was believed;
          Reward he got: the term, which-sorely grieved,
          Was now reduced; indeed, what had he done,
          That should prevent it?--If away he'd run,
          Who would not do the same who weds a shrew?
          Sure worse below the devil never knew!
          A brawling woman's tongue, what saint can bear?
          E'en Job, Honesta would have taught despair.

          WHAT is the inference? you ask:--I'll tell;--
          Live single, if you know you are well;
          But if old Hymen o'er your senses reign,
          Beware Honestas, or you'll rue the chain.

          * By this character La Fontaine is supposed to
          have meant his own wife.






                       THE LITTLE BELL


          HOW weak is man! how changeable his mind!
          His promises are naught, too oft we find;
          I vowed (I hope in tolerable verse,)
          Again no idle story to rehearse.
          And whence this promise?--Not two days ago;
          I'm quite confounded; better I should know:
          A rhymer hear then, who himself can boast,
          Quite steady for--a minute at the most.
          The pow'rs above could PRUDENCE ne'er design;
          For those who fondly court the SISTERS NINE.
          Some means to please they've got, you will confess;
          But none with certainty the charm possess.
          If, howsoever, I were doomed to find
          Such lines as fully would content the mind:
          Though I should fail in matter, still in art;
          I might contrive some pleasure to impart.

          LET'S see what we are able to obtain:--
          A bachelor resided in Touraine.
          A sprightly youth, who oft the maids beset,
          And liked to prattle to the girls he met,
          With sparkling eyes, white teeth, and easy air,
          Plain russet petticoat and flowing hair,
          Beside a rivulet, while Io round,
          With little bell that gave a tinkling sound,
          On herbs her palate gratified at will,
          And gazed and played, and fondly took her fill.

          AMONG the rustic nymphs our spark perceived
          A charming girl, for whom his bosom heaved;
          Too young, however, to feel the poignant smart,
          By Cupid oft inflicted on the heart.
          I will not say thirteen's an age unfit
          The contrary most fully I admit;
          The LAW supposes (such its prudent fears)
          Maturity at still more early years;
          But this apparently refers to towns,
          While LOVE was born for groves, and lawns, and downs.

          THE youth exerted ev'ry art to please;
          But all in vain: he only seemed to teaze:
          Whate'er he said, however nicely graced,
          Ill-humour, inexperience, or distaste,
          Induced the belle, unlearned in Cupid's book;
          To treat his passion with a froward look.

          BELIEVING ev'ry artifice in love
          Was tolerated by the pow'rs above,
          One eve he turned a heifer from the rest;
          Conducted by the girl his thoughts possessed;
          The others left, not counted by the fair,
          (Youth seldom shows the necessary care,)
          With easy, loit'ring steps the cottage sought,
          Where ev'ry night they usually were brought.

          HER mother, more experienced than the maid,
          Observed, that from the cattle one had strayed;
          The girl was scolded much, and sent to find
          The heifer indiscreetly left behind.
          Fair Isabella gave a vent to tears;
          Invoked sweet echo to disperse her fears:
          Solicited with fervent, piercing cry,
          To tell her where lorn Io she might spy,
          Whose little bell the spark deprived of sound;
          When he withdrew her from the herd around.

          THE lover now the tinkling metal shook;
          The path that t'wards it led the charmer took.
          The well known note was pleasing to her ear;
          Without suspecting treachery was near,
          She followed to a wood, both deep and large,
          In hopes at least she might regain her charge.

          GUESS her surprise, good reader, when she heard,
          A lover's voice, who would not be deterred.
          Said he, fair maid whene'er the heart's on fire,
          'Tis all permitted that can quench desire.
          On this, with piercing cries she rent the air;
          But no one came:--she sunk to dire despair.

          YE beauteous dames avoid the Sylvan shade;
          Dread dangers solitary woods pervade.






                         THE GLUTTON


          A STURGEON, once, a glutton famed was led
          To have for supper--all, except the head.
          With wond'rous glee he feasted on the fish;
          And quickly swallowed down the royal dish.
          O'ercharged, howe'er, his stomach soon gave way;
          And doctors were required without delay.

          THE danger imminent, his friends desired
          He'd settle ev'ry thing affairs required.
          Said he, in that respect I'm quite prepared;
          And, since my time so little is declared,
          With diligence, I earnestly request,
          The sturgeon's head you'll get me nicely dressed.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Avoid attorneys, if you comfort crave
Few ponder long when they can dupe with ease
He who loves would fain be loved as well







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALES AND NOVELS, V9: BELPHEGOR AND OTHERS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


