The Project Gutenberg eBook of Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 22
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 22

Author: Jean de La Fontaine


        
Release date: March 1, 2004 [eBook #5296]
                Most recently updated: December 28, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/5296

Credits: This eBook was produced by David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 22 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





                       THE TALES AND NOVELS
                                OF
                        J. DE LA FONTAINE



          Volume 22.

          Contains:
             The Picture
             The Pack-Saddle
             The Ear-maker, and The Mould-Mender



                         THE PICTURE


          SOLICITED I've been to give a tale,
          In which (though true, decorum must prevail),
          The subject from a picture shall arise,
          That by a curtain's kept from vulgar eyes.
          My brain must furnish various features new:
          What's delicate and smart produce to view;
          By this expressed, and not by t'other said:
          And all so clear, most easy to be read,
          By ev'ry fool, without the aid of notes,
          That idiot's bad indeed who never quotes.

          CATULLUS tells us, ev'ry matron sage
          Will peep most willingly (whate'er her age),
          At that gigantick gift, which Juno made,
          To Venus' fruit, in gardens oft displayed.
          If any belle recede, and shun the sight,
          Dissimulation she supposes right.

          THIS principle allowed, why scruples make?
          Why, less than eyes, should ears a license take?
          But since 'tis so resolved I'll do my best,
          And naught in open terms shall be expressed:
          A veil shall over ev'ry charm be cast,
          Of gauze indeed, and this from first to last,
          So nicely done, that howsoever tost,
          To none I trust will any thing be lost.
          Who nicely thinks, and speaks with graceful ease;
          Can current make just whatsoe'er he please;
          For all will pass, as I have often known:
          The word well chosen, pardon soon is shown,
          The sex o'erlook the thing no more the same,
          The thought remains, but 'tis without a name;
          No blush is raised; no difficulty found;
          Yet ev'ry body understands around.

          AT present, much I need this useful art:
          Why? you will ask; because, when I impart
          Such wondrous circumstances, ev'ry belle,
          Without reserve, will con them over well.
          To this I answer: female ears are chaste,
          Though roguish are their eyes, as well as taste.

          BE that as 'twill, I certainly should like,
          With freedom to explain, by terms oblique,
          To belles, how this was broken:--that was down:
          Assist me pray, ye NINE of high renown;
          But you are maids, and strangers, we agree,
          To LOVE'S soft scenes, not knowing A from B.
          Remain then, Muses, never stir an inch,
          But beg the god of verse, when at a pinch,
          To help me out and kind assistance lend,
          To choose expressions which will not offend,
          Lest I some silly things should chance to say,
          That might displeasure raise, and spoil my lay.
          Enough, howe'er, we've on the subject said:
          'Tis time we t'wards the painting should be led,
          Which an adventure you will find contains,
          That happened once in Cupid's famed domains.

          IN former days, just by Cythera town
          A monastery was, of some renown,
          With nuns the queens of beauty filled the place,
          And gay gallants you easily might trace.
          The courtier, citizen, and parson too,
          The doctor and the bachelor you'd view,
          With eager steps:--all visits thither made;
          And 'mong the latter, one (a pleasing blade)
          Had free access: was thought a prudent friend,
          Who might to sisters many comforts lend;
          Was always closely shaved and nicely dressed;
          And ev'ry thing he said was well expressed;
          The breath of scandal, howsoever pat,
          Ne'er lighted on his neat cravat nor hat.

          TWO nuns alternatively, from the youth;
          Experienced many services, in truth;
          The one had recently a novice been;
          Few months had passed since she complete was seen;
          The other still the dress of novice wore;
          The youngest's age was seventeen years, not more
          Time doubtless very proper (to be plain)
          Love's wily thesis fully to sustain:
          The bachelor so well the fair had taught,
          And they so earnestly the science sought,
          That by experience both the art had learned,
          And ev'ry thing most perfectly discerned.

          THESE sisters eagerly had made one day
          An assignation with the lover gay;
          To have the entertainment quite complete,
          They'd Bacchus, Ceres too, who Venus greet:
          With perfect neatness all the meats were served,
          And naught from grace and elegancy swerved;
          The wines, the custards, jellies, creams, and ice:
          The decorations, ev'ry thing was nice;
          What pleasing objects and delights were viewed!
          The room with sweetest flow'rs fair Flora strewed;
          A sort of garden o'er the linen traced
          Here lakes of love:--there names entwined were placed;
          Magnificence like this the nuns admired,
          And such amusements ardently desired.
          Their beauty too incited to be free;
          A thousand matters filled their souls with glee;
          In height the belles were pretty much the same
          Like alabaster fair; of perfect frame;
          In num'rous corners Cupid nestling lay:
          Beneath a stomacher he'd slyly play,
          A veil or scapulary, this or that,
          Where least the eye of day perceived he sat,
          Unless a lover called to mystick bow'rs,
          Where he might hearts entwine with chains of flow'rs;
          A thousand times a day the urchin flew,
          With open arms the sisters to pursue;
          Their charms were such in ev'ry air and look,
          Both (one by one) he for his mother took.

          WITH anxious looks, the ladies thus prepared,
          Expected him who all their kindness shared;
          Now they bestowed abuse; next fondly praised:
          Then of his conduct dark suspicions raised,
          Conceived, a new amour him kept away:
          What can it be, said one, that makes him stay?
          Of honour an affair.--love--sickness--what?
          Said t'other whether it be this or that,
          If here again his face he ever show,
          A pretty trick in turn we'll let him know.

          WHILE thus the couple sought their plot to frame,
          A convent porter with a burden came,
          For her who kept the stores of ev'ry kind,
          Depositary of the whole designed.
          'Twas merely a pretence, as I am told:
          The things were not required for young or old;
          But she much appetite had got in truth,
          Which made her have recourse to such a youth,
          Who was regarded, in repasts like these,
          A first rate cook that all prepared at ease.

          THIS awkward, heavy lout mistook the cell;
          By chance upon our ladies' room he fell,
          And knocked with weighty hands: they ope'd the door.
          And gave abuse, but soon their anger o'er,
          The nuns conceived a treasure they had found,
          And, laughing heartily, no longer frowned,
          But both exclaimed at once: let's take this fool;
          Of him we easily can make a tool;
          As well as t'other, don't you think he'll do?
          The eldest added:--let's our whim pursue;
          'Tis well determined;--What were we to get,
          That here we waited, and are waiting yet?
          Fine words and phrases; nothing of the kind;
          This wight 's as good, for what we have a mind,
          As any bachelor or doctor wise
          At all events, for present, he'll suffice.

          SHE rightly judged; his height, form, simple air,
          And ev'ry act, so clearly void of care,
          Raised expectation; this was AEsop's man,
          He never thought: 'twas all without a plan;
          Both ate and drank, and, had he been at will,
          Would matters far have pushed, though void of skill.

          FAMILIAR grown, the fellow ready seemed,
          To execute whate'er was proper deemed;
          To serve the convent he was porter made,
          And in their wishes nuns of course obeyed.

          'TIS here begins the subject we've in view,
          The scene that faithfully our painter drew;
          Apollo, give me aid, assistance lend,
          Enable me, I pray, to comprehend,
          Why this mean stupid rustick sat at ease,
          And left the sisters (Claudia, formed to please,
          And lovely fair Theresa) all the care?
          Had he not better done to give a chair?

          I THINK I hear the god of verse reply:
          Not quite so fast my friend, you may rely,
          These matters never can the probe endure;
          I understand you; Cupid, to be sure,
          Is doubtless found a very roguish boy,
          Who, though he please at times, will oft annoy;
          I'm wrong a wicked whelp like this to take,
          And, master of the ceremonies make.

          NO sooner in a house the urchin gets,
          But rules and laws he at defiance sets;
          The place of reason whim at once assumes,
          Breaks ev'ry obstacle, frets, rages, fumes.
          With scenes like these will Cupid oft surprise,
          And frantick passion sparkle in his eyes.

          SOON on the floor was seen this boorish wight;
          For, whether that the chair was rather slight,
          Or that the composition of the clown
          Was not, like that of geese, of softest down,
          Or that Theresa, by her gay discourse,
          Had penetrated to the mystick source,
          The am'rous pulpit suddenly gave way,
          And on the ground the rustick quickly lay.
          The first attempt had clearly bad success,
          And fair Theresa suffered you may guess.

          YE censors keep from hence your eyes prophane;
          See, honest hearts, how Claudia tried amain,
          To take advantage of the dire mishap,
          And all she could, with eagerness entrap;
          For in the fall Theresa lost her hold;
          The other pushed her:--further off she rolled;
          And then, what she had quitted Claudia seized;
          Theresa, like a demon quite displeased,
          Endeavoured to recover what she'd lost:--
          Again to take her seat, but she was crossed.
          The sister in possession ne'er inclined
          To cede a post so pleasant to her mind;
          Theresa raised her hand to give a stroke;
          And what of that?--if any thing provoke
          When thus engaged, unheeded it remains
          Small ills are soon forgot where pleasure reigns.

          IN spite of rage apparent in the face;
          Of her who in the scuffle lost her place,
          The other followed up the road she took;
          His course the rustick also ne'er forsook.
          Theresa scolded; anger marked her eyes;
          In Venus' games contentions oft arise;
          Their violence no parallel has seen:--
          In proof, remember Menelaus' queen.
          Though here to take a part Bellona 's found,
          Of cuirasses I see but few around;
          When Venus closes with the god of Thrace,
          Her armour then appears with ev'ry grace.
          The FAIR will understand: enough is said;
          When beauty's goddess is to combat led,
          Her body-cuirass shows superior charms;
          The Cyclops rarely forge such pleasing arms.
          Had Vulcan graven on Achilles' shield
          The picture we've described, more praise 'twould yield.

          THE nun's adventure I in verse have told,
          But not in colours, like the action, bold;
          And as the story in the picture fails,
          The latter seems to lose in my details.
          The pen and brush express not quite the same;
          Eyes are not ears, however we may aim.

          ENTANGLED in the net, I long have left
          The fair Theresa, of her throne bereft;
          Howe'er, this sister had her turn we find,
          So much to please, the porter was inclined,
          That both were satisfied, and felt content;
          Here ends our tale, and truly I lament,
          That not a word about the feast is said,
          Though I've no doubt, they freely drank and fed;
          And this for reasons easily conceived:
          The interlude gave rest that much relieved.
          In fine, 'twas well throughout, except, in truth,
          The hour of meeting settled with the youth,
          Which much embarrasses I will avow,
          For if he never came and made his bow,
          The sisters had the means, when they might please,
          Completely to console themselves at ease;
          And if the spark appeared, the belles could hide
          Both clown and chair, or any thing beside
          The lover what he wanted soon possessed,
          And was as usual treated with the best.






                       THE PACK-SADDLE


          A FAMOUS painter, jealous of his wife;
          Whose charms he valued more than fame or life,
          When going on a journey used his art,
          To paint an ASS upon a certain part,
          (Umbilical, 'tis said) and like a seal:
          Impressive token, nothing thence to steal.

          A BROTHER brush, enamoured of the dame;
          Now took advantage, and declared his flame:
          The Ass effaced, but God knows how 'twas done;
          Another soon howe'er he had begun,
          And finished well, upon the very spot;
          In painting, few more praises ever got;
          But want of recollection made him place
          A saddle, where before he none could trace.

          THE husband, when returned, desired to look
          At what he drew, when leave he lately took.
          Yes, see my dear, the wily wife replied,
          The Ass is witness, faithful I abide.
          Zounds! said the painter, when he got a sight,--
          What!--you'd persuade me ev'ry thing is right?
          I wish the witness you display so well,
          And him who saddled it, were both in Hell.






              THE EAR-MAKER AND THE MOULD-MENDER


          WHEN William went from home (a trader styled):
          Six months his better half he left with child,
          A simple, comely, modest, youthful dame,
          Whose name was Alice; from Champaign she came.
          Her neighbour Andrew visits now would pay;
          With what intention, needless 'tis to say:
          A master who but rarely spread his net,
          But, first or last, with full success he met;
          And cunning was the bird that 'scaped his snare;
          Without surrendering a feather there.

          QUITE raw was Alice; for his purpose fit;
          Not overburdened with a store of wit;
          Of this indeed she could not be accused,
          And Cupid's wiles by her were never used;
          Poor lady, all with her was honest part,
          And naught she knew of stratagem or art.

          HER husband then away, and she alone,
          This neighbour came, and in a whining tone,
          To her observed, when compliments were o'er:--
          I'm all astonishment, and you deplore,
          To find that neighbour William's gone from hence,
          And left your child's completing in suspense,
          Which now you bear within, and much I fear,
          That when 'tis born you'll find it wants an ear.
          Your looks sufficiently the fact proclaim,
          For many instances I've known the same.
          Good heav'ns! replied the lady in a fright;
          What say you, pray?--the infant won't be right!
          Shall I be mother to a one-eared child?
          And know you no relief that's certain styled?
          Oh yes, there is, rejoined the crafty knave,
          From such mishap I can the baby save;
          Yet solemnly I vow, for none but you
          I'd undertake the toilsome job to do.
          The ills of others, if I may be plain,
          Except your husband's, never give me pain;
          But him I'd serve for ever, while I've breath;
          To do him good I'd e'en encounter death.
          Now let us see, without more talk or fears,
          If I know how to forge the bantling ears.
          Remember, cried the wife, to make them like.
          Leave that to me, said he, I'll justly strike.
          Then he prepared for work; the dame gave way;
          Not difficult she proved:--well pleased she lay;
          Philosophy was never less required,
          And Andrew's process much the fair admired,
          Who, to his work extreme attention paid;
          'Twas now a tendon; then a fold he made,
          Or cartilage, of which he formed enough,
          And all without complaining of the stuff.
          To-morrow we will polish it, said he:
          Then in perfection soon the whole will be;
          And from repeating this so oft, you'll get
          As perfect issue as was ever met.
          I'm much obliged to you, the wife replied,
          A friend is good in whom we may confide.

          NEXT day, when tardy Time had marked the hour;
          That Andrew hoped again to use his pow'r,
          He was not plunged in sleep, but briskly flew,
          His purpose with the charmer to pursue.
          Said he, all other things aside I've laid,
          This ear to finish, and to lend you aid.
          And I, the dame replied, was on the eve,
          To send and beg you not the job to leave;
          Above stairs let us go:--away they ran,
          And quickly recommenced as they began.
          The work so oft was smoothed, that Alice showed
          Some scruples lest the ear he had bestowed
          Should do too much, and to the wily wight,
          She said, so little you the labour slight,
          'Twere well if ears no more than two appear;
          Of that, rejoined the other, never fear;
          I've guarded thoroughly against defects,
          Mistake like that shall ne'er your senses vex.

          THE ear howe'er was still in hand the same,
          When from his journey home the husband came.
          Saluted Alice, who with anxious look,
          Exclaimed,--your work how finely you forsook,
          And, but for neighbour Andrew's kindness here,
          Our child would incomplete have been--an ear,
          I could not let a thing remain like this,
          And Andrew would not be to friends remiss,
          But, worthy man, he left his thriving trade,
          And for the babe a proper ear has made.

          THE husband, not conceiving how his wife,
          Could be so weak and ignorant of life,
          The circumstances made her fully tell,
          Repeat them o'er and on each action dwell.
          Enraged at length, a pistol by the bed
          He seized and swore at once he'd shoot her dead.
          The belle with tears replied, howe'er she'd swerved,
          Such cruel treatment never she deserved.
          Her innocence, and simple, gentle way,
          At length appeared his frantick rage to lay.
          What injury, continued she, is done?
          The strictest scrutiny I would not shun;
          Your goods and money, ev'ry thing is right;
          And Andrew told me, nothing he would slight;
          That you would find much more than you could want;
          And this I hope to me you'll freely grant;
          If falsehood I advance, my life I'll lose;
          Your equity, I trust, will me excuse.

          A LITTLE cooled, then William thus replied,
          We'll say no more; you have been drawn aside;
          What passed you fancied acting for the best,
          And I'll consent to put the thing at rest;
          To nothing good such altercations tend;
          I've but a word: to that attention lend;
          Contrive to-morrow that I here entrap
          This fellow who has caused your sad mishap;
          You'll utter not a word of what I've said;
          Be secret or at once I'll strike you dead.
          Adroitly you must act: for instance say;
          I'm on a second journey gone away;
          A message or a letter to him send,
          Soliciting that he'll on you attend,
          That something you have got to let him know;--
          To come, no doubt, the rascal won't be slow;
          Amuse him then with converse most absurd,
          But of the EAR remember,--not a word;
          That's finished now, and nothing can require;
          You'll carefully perform what I desire.
          Poor innocent! the point she nicely hit;
          Fear oft gives simpletons a sort of wit.

          THE arch gallant arrived; the husband came
          Ascended to the room where sat his dame;
          Much noise he made, his coming to announce;
          The lover, terrified, began to bounce;
          Now here, now there, no shelter could he meet;
          Between the bed and wall he put his feet,
          And lay concealed, while William loudly knocked;
          Fair Alice readily the door unlocked,
          And, pointing with her hand, informed the spouse,
          Where he might easily his rival rouse.

          THE husband ev'ry way was armed so well,
          He four such men as Andrew could repel;
          In quest of succour howsoe'er he went:
          To kill him surely William never meant,
          But only take an ear, or what the Turks,
          Those savage beasts, cut off from Nature's works;
          Which doubtless must be infinitely worse
          Infernal practice and continual curse.
          'Twas this he whispered should be Andrew's doom,
          When with his easy wife he left the room;
          She nothing durst reply: the door he shut,
          And our gallant 'gan presently to strut,
          Around and round, believing all was right,
          And William unacquainted with his plight.

          THE latter having well the project weighed,
          Now changed his plan, and other schemes surveyed;
          Proposed within himself revenge to take,
          With less parade:--less noise it then would make,
          And better fruit the action would produce,
          Than if he were apparently profuse.
          Said he to Alice, go and seek his wife;
          To her relate the whole that caused our strife;
          Minutely all from first to last detail;
          And then the better on her to prevail,
          To hasten here, you'll hint that you have fears,
          That Andrew risks the loss of--more than ears,
          For I have punishment severe in view,
          Which greatly she must wish I should not do;
          But if an ear-maker, like this, is caught,
          The worst of chastisement is always sought;
          Such horrid things as scarcely can be said:
          They make the hair to stand upon the head;
          That he's upon the point of suff'ring straight,
          And only for her presence things await;
          That though she cannot all proceedings stay,
          Perhaps she may some portion take away.
          Go, bring her instantly, haste quickly, run;
          And, if she comes, I'll pardon what's been done.

          WITH joy to Andrew's house fair Alice went;
          The wife to follow her appeared content;
          Quite out of breath, alone she ran up stairs,
          And, not perceiving him who shared her cares;
          Believed he was imprisoned in a room;
          And while with fear she trembled for his doom;
          The master (having laid aside his arms)
          Now came to compliment the lady's charms;
          He gave the belle a chair, who looked most nice:--
          Said he, ingratitude's the worst of vice;
          To me your husband has been wondrous kind;
          So many services has done I find,
          That, ere you leave this house, I'd wish to make
          A little return, and this you will partake.
          When I was absent from my loving dear,
          Obligingly he made her babe an ear.
          The compliment of course I must admire;
          Retaliation is what I desire,
          And I've a thought:--your children all have got
          The nose a little short, which is a blot;
          A fault within the mould no doubt's the cause,
          Which I can mend, and any other flaws.
          The business now let's execute I pray,
          On which the dame he took without delay,
          And placed her near where Andrew hid his head,
          Then 'gan to operate as he was led.

          THE, lady patiently his process bore,
          And blessed her stars that Andrew's risk was o'er
          That she had thus the dire return received,
          And saved the man for whom her bosom grieved.
          So much emotion William seemed to feel,
          No grace he gave, but all performed with zeal;
          Retaliated ev'ry way so well,
          He measure gave for measure:--ell for ell.
          How true the adage, that revenge is sweet!
          The plan he followed clearly was discrete;
          For since he wished his honour to repair:--
          Of any better way I'm not aware.

          THE whole without a murmur Andrew viewed,
          And thanked kind Heav'n that nothing worse ensued;
          One ear most readily he would have lost,
          Could he be certain that would pay the cost.
          He thought 'twould lucky be, could he get out,
          For all considered, better 'twere no doubt,
          Howe'er ridiculous the thing appears,
          To have a pair of horns than lose his ears.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Not overburdened with a store of wit







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 22 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


