The Project Gutenberg eBook of Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 19
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 19

Author: Jean de La Fontaine


        
Release date: March 1, 2004 [eBook #5293]
                Most recently updated: December 28, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/5293

Credits: This eBook was produced by David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 19 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





                       THE TALES AND NOVELS
                                OF
                        J. DE LA FONTAINE



          Volume 19.

          Contains:
             The Psalter
             King Candaules and the Doctor of Laws



                          THE PSALTER


          ONCE more permit me, nuns, and this the last;
          I can't resist, whatever may have passed,
          But must relate, what often I've been told;
          Your tales of convent pranks are seldom cold;
          They have a grace that no where else we find,
          And, somehow, better seem to please designed.
          Another then we'll have, which three will make:--
          Three did I say?-'tis four, or I mistake;
          Let's count them well:-The GARD'NER first, we'll name;
          Then comes the ABBESS, whose declining frame
          Required a youth, her malady to cure
          A story thought, perhaps, not over pure;
          And, as to SISTER JANE, who'd got a brat,
          I cannot fancy we should alter that.
          These are the whole, and four's a number round;
          You'll probably remark, 'tis strange I've found
          Such pleasure in detailing convent scenes:--
          'Tis not my whim, but TASTE, that thither leans:
          And, if you'd kept your breviary in view,
          'Tis clear, you'd nothing had with this to do;
          We know, howe'er, 'tis not your fondest care;
          So, quickly to our hist'ry let's repair.

          A CHARMING youth would frequent visits pay,
          To nuns, whose convent near his dwelling lay;
          And, 'mong the sisters, one his person saw,
          Who, by her eyes, would fain attention draw;
          Smiles she bestowed, and other complaisance,
          But not a single step would he advance;
          By old and young he greatly was admired;
          Sighs burst around, but none his bosom fired.
          Fair Isabella solely got his love,
          A beauteous nun, and gentle as a dove,
          Till then a novice in the flow'ry chain,
          And envied doubly:--for her charms and swain.
          Their soft amours were watched with eagle-eye:
          No pleasure's free from care you may rely;
          In life each comfort coupled is with ill,
          And this to alter baffles all our skill.

          THE sister nuns so vigilant had been,
          One night when darkness overspread the scene;
          And all was proper mysteries to hide,
          Some words escaped her cell that doubts supplied,
          And other matters too were heard around,
          That in her breviary could not be found.
          'Tis her gallant! said they: he's clearly caught;
          Alarm pervaded; swarms were quickly brought;
          Rage seemed to triumph; sentinels were placed;
          The abbess too must know they were disgraced.
          Away they hastened to convey surprise,
          And, thund'ring at her door, cried, madam rise,
          For sister Isabella, in her cell,
          Has got a man, which surely can't be well.

          YOU will observe, the dame was not at prayer,
          Nor yet absorbed in sleep, devoid of care,
          But with her then, this abbess had in bed
          Good parson John, by kindness thither led,
          A neighb'ring rector, confessor, and friend;
          She rose in haste the sisters to attend,
          And, seeking for her veil, with sense confused,
          The parson's breeches took for what she used,
          Which, in the dark, resembled what was worn
          By nuns for veils, and called (perhaps in scorn),
          Among themselves, their PSALTER, to express
          Familiarly, a common, awkward dress.

          WITH this new ornament, by way of veil,
          She sallied forth and heard the woeful tale.
          Then, irritated, she exclaimed with ire
          To see this wretched creature I desire,
          The devil's daughter, from her bold career,
          Who'll bring our convent to disgrace, I fear;
          But God forbid, I say, and with his leave,
          We'll all restore:--rebuke she shall receive.
          A chapter we will call:--the sisters came,
          And stood around to hear their pious dame.

          FAIR Isabella now the abbess sent,
          Who straight obeyed, and to her tears gave vent,
          Which overspread those lily cheeks and eyes,
          A roguish youth so lately held his prize.
          What! said the abbess: pretty scandal here,
          When in the house of God such things appear;
          Ashamed to death you ought to be, no doubt,
          Who brought you thither?--such we always scout.

          NOW Isabella, (--sister you must lose,
          Henceforth, that name to you we cannot use;
          The honour is too great,) in such a case,
          Pray are you sensible of your disgrace,
          And what's the punishment you'll undergo?
          Before to-morrow, this you'll fully know;
          Our institution chastisement decrees;
          Come speak, I say, we'll hear you if you please.

          POOR Isabella, with her sight on ground,
          Confused, till then had scarcely looked around,
          Now raised her eyes, and luckily perceived
          The breeches, which her fears in part relieved,
          And that the sisters, by surprise unnerved,
          As oft's the case, had never once observed.
          She courage took, and to the abbess said,
          There's something from the Psalter, on your head,
          That awkwardly hangs down; pray, madam, try
          To put it right, or 'twill be in your eye.

          'TWAS knee-strings, worn, at times, by priests and beaux,
          For, more or less, all follow fashion's laws.
          This veil, no doubt, had very much the air
          Of those unmentionables parsons wear;
          And this the nun, to frolicking inclined,
          It seems had well impressed upon her mind.
          What, cried the abbess, dares she still to sneer?
          How great her insolence to laugh and jeer,
          When sins so heavily upon her rest,
          And ev'ry thing remains quite unconfessed.
          Upon my word, she'd be a saint decreed;
          My veil, young imp, your notice cannot need;
          'Tis better think, you little hellish crow,
          What pains your soul must undergo below.

          THE mother abbess sermonized and fired,
          And seemed as if her tongue would ne'er be tired.
          Again the culprit said, your Psalter, pray,
          Good madam, haste to set the proper way;
          On which the sisters looked, both young and old
          THOSE 'gan to laugh, while THESE were heard to scold.

          OUR preacher, quite ashamed of what she'd done,
          Now lost her voice, and noticed not the nun;
          The murmur buzzed around, too well expressed,
          What thoughts the holy sisterhood possessed.
          At length the abbess said:--we've now not time
          To take the chapter's votes upon her crime;
          'Twould make it late; let each to bed return,
          And, till to-morrow, we'll the case adjourn.
          No chapter met, howe'er, when morrow came;
          Another day arrived, and still the same;
          The sages of the convent thought it best,
          In fact, to let the mystick business rest.
          Much noise, perhaps, would hurt religion's cause,
          And, that considered, prudent 'twere to pause.
          Base envy made them Isabella hate,
          And dark suspicions to the abbess state.
          In short, unable by their schemes to get
          The morsel she'd so fortunately met,
          Each nun exerted all her art to find,
          What equally might satisfy the mind.
          Old friends were willingly received again;
          Her gallant our belle was suffered to retain;
          The rector and the abbess had their will;
          And, such their union, precepts to fulfill,
          That if a nun had none to give her bliss,
          To lend a friend was nothing thought amiss.






             KING CANDAULES AND THE DOCTOR OF LAWS


          IN life oft ills from self-imprudence spring;
          As proof, Candaules' story we will bring;
          In folly's scenes the king was truly great:
          His vassal, Gyges, had from him a bait,
          The like in gallantry was rarely known,
          And want of prudence never more was shown.

          MY friend, said he, you frequently have seen
          The beauteous face and features of the queen;
          But these are naught, believe me, to the rest,
          Which solely can be viewed when quite undressed.
          Some day I'll let you gratify your eyes;
          Without her knowledge I'll means devise;
          But on condition:--you'll remember well
          What you behold, to no one you will tell,
          In ev'ry step most cautiously proceed,
          And not your mind with silly wishes feed;
          No sort of pleasure surely I could take,
          To see vain passion you her lover make.
          You must propose, this charming form to view,
          As if mere marble, though to nature true;
          And I'm convinced you'll readily declare,
          Beyond nor art can reach, nor thought prepare;
          Just now I left her in the bath at ease:
          A judge you are, and shall the moment seize;
          Come, witness my felicity supreme;
          You know her beauties are my constant theme.

          AWAY they went, and Gyges much admired;
          Still more than that: in truth his breast was fired;
          For when she moved astonishment was great,
          And ev'ry grace upon her seemed to wait.
          Emotion to suppress howe'er he tried,
          Since he had promised what he felt to hide;
          To hold his tongue he wished, but that might raise
          Suspicions of designs and mystick ways.
          Exaggeration was the better part,
          And from the subject he would never start,
          But fully praised each beauty in detail,
          Without appearing any thing to veil.
          Gods! Gyges cried, how truly, king, you're blessed;
          The skin how fair--how charming all the rest!

          THIS am'rous conversation by the queen
          Was never heard, or she'd enraged have been;
          In ancient days of ignorance, we find,
          The sex, to show resentment, much inclined;
          In diff'rent light at present this appears,
          And fulsome praises ne'er offend their ears.

          OUR arch observer struggled with his sighs
          Those feelings much increased, so fair the prize:
          The prince, in doubt, conducted him away;
          But in his heart a hundred arrows lay;
          Each magick charm directed pointed darts;
          To flee were useless: LOVE such pain imparts,
          That nothing can at times obstruct its course;
          So quick the flight: so truly great the force.

          WHILE near the king, much caution Gyges showed;
          But soon the belle perceived his bosom glowed;
          She learned the cause:--her spouse the tale disclosed,
          And laughed and jeered, as he the facts exposed:
          A silly blockhead! not to know a queen
          Could raillery not bear on such a scene.
          But had it pleased her wishes, still 'twere right
          (Such honour's dictates) to discover spite;
          And this she truly did, while in her mind,
          To be revenged she fully was inclined.

          FOR once, good reader, I should wish thee wife;
          Or otherwise, thou never can'st in life,
          Conceive the lengths a woman oft will go,
          Whose breast is filled with wrath and secret woe.
          A mortal was allowed these charms to view,
          Which others' eyes could never dare pursue.
          Such treasures were for gods, or rather kings
          The privilege of both are beauteous things.

          THESE thoughts induced the queen revenge to seek;
          Rage moved her breast, and shame possessed her cheek.
          E'en Cupid, we are told, assistance gave;
          What from his aim effectually can save?
          Fair in person was Gyges to behold;
          Excuses for her easy 'twere to mould;
          To show her charms, what baseness could excel?
          And on th' exposer all her hatred fell.
          Besides, he was a husband, which is worse
          With these each sin receives a double curse.
          What more shall I detail?--the facts are plain:
          Detested was the king:--beloved the swain;
          All was accomplished, and the monarch placed
          Among the heroes who with horns are graced;
          No doubt a dignity not much desired,
          Though in repute, and easily acquired.

          SUCH merit had the prince's folly got,
          'In petto', Vulcan's brother was his lot;
          The distance thence is little to the HAT:
          The honour much the same of this or that.

          SO far 'twas passing well, but, in the intrigue;
          The cruel Parcae now appeared to league;
          And soon the lovers, on possession bent,
          To black Cocytus' shores the monarch sent;
          Too much of certain potions forced to drink,
          He quickly viewed the dreary, horrid brink;
          While pleasing the objects Gyges' eyes beheld;
          And in the palace presently he dwelled,
          For, whether love or rage the widow fired,
          Her throne and hand she gave, as was required.

          T' EXTEND this tale was never my design;
          Though known full well, I do not now repine;
          The case so thoroughly my purpose served.
          Ne'er from the narrative the object swerved;
          And scarcely can I fancy, better light
          The DOCTOR will afford to what I write.
          The scenes that follow I from Rome have drawn;
          Not Rome of old, ere manners had their dawn,
          When customs were unpleasant and severe
          The females, silly, and gallants in fear;
          But Rome of modern days, delightful spot!
          Where better tastes have into fashion got,
          And pleasure solely occupies the mind
          To rapture ev'ry bosom seems resigned.
          A tempting journey truly it appears,
          For youths from twenty on to thirty years.

          NOT long ago, then, in the city dwelled,
          A master, who in teaching law excelled;
          In other matters he, howe'er, was thought
          A man that jollity and laughter sought.
          He criticised whatever passed around,
          And oft, at others' cost, diversion found.

          IT happened that our learned doctor had,
          Among his many pupils (good and bad)
          A Frenchman, less designed to study laws,
          Than, in amours, perhaps, to gain applause.
          One day, observing him with clouded mien,
          My friend, said he, you surely have the spleen,
          And, out of college, nothing seem to do;
          No law books read:--some object I'd pursue;
          A handsome Frenchman should his hours improve;
          Seek soft intrigues, or as a lover move;
          Talents you have, and gay coquettes are here
          Not one, thank heav'n, but numbers oft appear.

          THE, student answered, I am new at Rome,
          And, save the belles who sell their beauteous bloom,
          I can't perceive, gallants much business find,
          Each house, like monasteries, is designed,
          With double doors, and bolts, and matrons sour,
          And husbands Argus-eyed, who'd you devour.
          Where can I go to follow up your plan,
          And hope, in spots like these, a flame to fan?
          'Twere not less difficult to reach the moon,
          And with my teeth I'd bite it just as soon.

          HA! HA! replied the doctor with delight,
          The honour which you do us is not slight;
          I pity men quite fresh and raw like you;
          Our town, I see, you've hardly travelled through,
          You fancy then, such wily snares are set,
          'Tis difficult intrigues in Rome to get.
          I'd have you know, we've creatures who devise,
          To horn their husbands under Argus' eyes.
          'Tis very common; only try around,
          And soon you'll find, that sly amours abound.
          Within the neighb'ring church go take your place,
          And, to the dames who pass in search of grace,
          Present your fingers dipt in water blessed:--
          A sign for those who wish to be caressed.
          In case the suppliant's air some lady please,
          Who knows her trade, and how to act at ease,
          She'll send a message, something to desire:
          You'll soon be found, wherever you retire,
          Though lodged so secretly, that God alone,
          Till then, your place of residence had known.
          An aged female will on you attend,
          Who, used to this, will full assistance lend,
          Arrange an interview with wily art;
          No trouble take, you'll have an easy part;
          No trouble did I say? why, that's too much;
          Some things I would except, their pow'r is such;
          And proper 'tis, my friend, that I should hint,
          Attentions you at Rome should well imprint,
          And be discrete; in France you favours boast:
          Of ev'ry moment here you make the most;
          The Romans to the greatest lengths proceed.

          So best, the spark replied, I like the deed;
          And, though no Gascon, I may boldly say;
          Superior prowess always I display.
          Perhaps 'twas otherwise, for ev'ry wight;
          In this, to play the Gascon, thinks it right.

          To all the doctor's words our youth adhered,
          And presently within a church appeared,
          Where daily came the choicest belles around,
          And loves and graces in their train were found,
          Or, if 'tis wished in modern phrase to speak,
          Attention num'rous angels there would seek.
          Beneath their veils were beauteous sparkling eyes;
          The holy-water scarcely would suffice.

          IN lucky spot the spark his station took,
          And gave to each that passed a plaintive look;
          To some he bowed; to others seemed to pray,
          And holy water offered on their way.
          One angel 'mong the rest the boon received,
          With easy pleasing air, that much relieved;
          On which the student to himself expressed,
          A fond belief, with her he might be blessed.

          WHEN home, an aged female to him came,
          And soon a meeting place he heard her name.
          To count particulars howe'er were vain
          Their pranks were many, and their folly plain;
          The belle was handsome; ev'ry bliss was sought,
          And all their moments most delightful thought.

          HE, to the doctor, ev'ry matter told
          Discretion in a Frenchman would be cold;
          'Tis out of nature, and bespeaks the cit;
          Smells strong of shop, and would not fashion fit.

          THE learned teacher satisfaction showed,
          That such success from his instructions flowed,
          Laughed heartily at husbands, silly wights,
          Who had not wit to guard connubial rights,
          And from their lamb the wily wolf to keep:
          A shepherd will o'erlook a hundred sheep,
          While foolish man's unable to protect,
          E'en one where most he'd wish to be correct.
          Howe'er, this care he thought was somewhat hard,
          But not a thing impossible to guard;
          And if he had not got a hundred eyes,
          Thank heav'n, his wife, though cunning to devise,
          He could defy:--her thoughts so well he knew,
          That these intrigues she never would pursue.

          YOU'LL, ne'er believe, good reader, without shame,
          The doctor's wife was she our annals name;
          And what's still worse, so many things he asked,
          Her look, air, form, and secret charms unmasked,
          That ev'ry answer fully seemed to say,
          'Twas clearly she, who thus had gone astray.
          One circumstance the lawyer led to doubt:
          Some talents had the student pointed out,
          Which she had never to her husband shown,
          And this relief administered alone.
          Thought he, those manners not to her belong,
          But all the rest are indications strong,
          And prove the case; yet she at home is dull;
          While this appears to be a prattling trull,
          And pleasing in her conversation too;
          In other matters 'tis my wife we view,
          Form, face, complexion, features, eyes, and hair,
          The whole combined pronounces her the fair.

          AT length, when to himself the sage had said
          'Tis she; and then, 'tis not;--his senses led
          To make him in the first opinion rest,
          You well may guess what rage was in his breast.
          A second meeting you have fixed? cried he;
          Yes, said the Frenchman, that was made with glee;
          We found the first so pleasing to our mind,
          That to another both were well inclined,
          And thoroughly resolved more fun to seek.
          That's right, replied the doctor, have your freak;
          The lady howsoe'er I now could name.
          The scholar answered, that to me's the same;
          I care not what she's called, Nor who she be:
          'Tis quite enough that we so well agree.
          By this time I'm convinced her loving spouse.
          Possesses what an anchorite might rouse;
          And if a failure any where be met,
          At such a place to-morrow one may get,
          What I shall hope, exactly at the hour,
          To find resigned and fully in my pow'r:

          IN bed I shall be instantly received,
          And from anxiety be soon relieved.
          The place of meeting is a room below,
          Most nicely furnished, rich, but void of show.
          At first I through a passage dark was led,
          Where Sol's bright rays are ne'er allowed to spread;
          But soon, by my conductress, I was brought,
          'Mid LOVE'S delights, where all with charms was frought.

          ON this you may suppose the doctor's pain;
          But presently he thought a point to gain,
          And take the student's place by wily art,
          Where, acting in disguise the lover's part,
          His rib he might entangle in a net,
          And vassalage bestow she'd ne'er forget.
          Our learned man was clearly in the wrong;
          'Twere better far to sleep and hold his tongue;
          Unless, with God's assistance, he could raise
          A remedy that merited full praise.
          Whenever wives have got a candidate,
          To be admitted to the Cuckold's state,
          If thence he get scot free 'tis luck indeed;
          But once received, and ornaments decreed,
          A blot the more will surely nothing add,
          To one already in the garment clad.
          The doctor otherwise however thought;
          Yet still his reason no advantage brought;
          Indeed he fancied, if he could forestall
          The youth who now he might his master call;
          The trick would to his wisdom credit do,
          And show, superior wiles he could pursue.

          AWAY the husband hastened to the place;
          In full belief, that, hiding well his face,
          And favoured by the darkness of the spot,
          The silence marked, and myst'ry of the plot,
          He, undiscovered, safely might be led,
          Where such delicious fruits were ready spread.

          MISFORTUNE, howsoe'er, would so direct
          The aged female nothing to neglect,
          Had with her got a lantern to conduct,
          The light from which at will she could obstruct,
          And, far more cunning than our learned sage,
          Perceived at once with whom she had t'engage;
          But, marking no surprise, she bade him wait,
          While she, his coming, to her dame should state.
          Said she, unless I tell her first you're here,
          I dare not let you in her room appear.
          Besides, you have not got the right attire;
          Undressed, in truth, is what she would desire.
          My lady, you must know, is gone to bed:--
          Then, thrusting in a dressing room his head,
          He there beheld the necessary fare,
          Of night-cap, slippers, shirt, and combs for hair,
          With perfumes too, in Rome the nicest known,
          And fit for highest cardinals to own.
          His clothes the learned doctor laid aside;
          The aged female came his steps to guide;
          Through passages she led him by the hand,
          Where all was dark, and many turnings planned;
          At once bewildered, and deprived of sight,
          The lawyer tottered much for want of light.
          At length she ope'd a door, and pushed the sage,
          Where most unpleasantly he must engage,
          Though doubtless ev'ry way his proper place:--
          The school where he was used the LAWS to trace!
          O'ercome with shame, confusion, and surprise,
          He nearly fainted, vain 'twere to disguise.

          THE circumstances ran throughout the town;
          Each student then was waiting in his gown;
          Enough, no doubt, his fortunes to destroy;
          The laugh went round, and all was jest and joy.
          What, is he mad? said they, or would he seek
          Some lass, and with her wish to have a freak?
          Still worse arrived:--his beauteous spouse complained;
          A trial followed, and distractions reigned;
          Her relatives supported well the cause,
          And represented, that the MAN of LAWS,
          Occasioned jars and matrimonial strife;
          That he was mad, and she, a prudent wife,
          The marriage was annulled, and she withdrew:
          Retirement now the lady would pursue,
          In Vavoureuse a prelate blessed the dame,
          And, at Saint Croissant, she a nun became.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

No pleasure's free from care you may rely







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 19 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


