The Project Gutenberg eBook of Widger's Quotations from the Project Gutenberg Editions of the Works of Abraham Lincoln
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Widger's Quotations from the Project Gutenberg Editions of the Works of Abraham Lincoln

Author: Abraham Lincoln

Editor: David Widger


        
Release date: January 1, 2003 [eBook #3626]
                Most recently updated: January 8, 2021

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/3626

Credits: This etext was produced by David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WIDGER'S QUOTATIONS FROM THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EDITIONS OF THE WORKS OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN ***
[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael S. Hart
and may be reprinted only when these Etexts are free of all fees.]
[Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales
of Project Gutenberg Etexts or other materials be they hardware or
software or any other related product without express permission.]





This etext was produced by David Widger  <widger@cecomet.net>





WIDGER'S QUOTATIONS

FROM THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EDITION OF
THE WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN





EDITOR'S NOTE

Readers acquainted with the Writings of Abraham Lincoln may wish to
see if their favorite passages are listed in this selection.  The etext
editor will be glad to add your suggestions. One of the advantages of
internet over paper publication is the ease of quick revision.

All the titles  may be found using the Project Gutenberg search engine
at:
                   http://promo.net/pg/

After downloading a specific file, the location and complete context of
the quotations may be found by inserting a small part of the quotation
into the 'Find' or 'Search' functions of the user's word processing
program.

The quotations are in two formats:
     1. Small passages from the text.
     2. Lists of alphabetized one-liners.

The editor may be contacted at <widger@cecomet.net> for comments,
questions or suggested additions to these extracts.

D.W.





CONTENTS:

The Writings of Abraham Lincoln, Vol 1 [Etext #2653] 1linc10.txt

The Writings of Abraham Lincoln, Vol 2 [Etext #2654] 2linc10.txt

The Writings of Abraham Lincoln, Vol 3 [Etext #2655] 3linc10.txt

The Writings of Abraham Lincoln, Vol 4 [Etext #2656] 4linc10.txt

The Writings of Abraham Lincoln, Vol 5 [Etext #2657] 5linc10.txt

The Writings of Abraham Lincoln, Vol 6 [Etext #2658] 6linc10.txt

The Writings of Abraham Lincoln, Vol 7 [Etext #2659] 7linc10.txt

The Entire Writings of Lincoln,        [Etext #3253] lnent10.txt







                           WIDGER'S QUOTATIONS



THE WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN, VOL 1
[Etext #2653] 1linc10.txt

Abolition
Advice to Youth
Affected Contempt of Refinement
Always Inclined to Idealize That Which We Love
Attempt to Beguile You from Your Grief
Avoid Being Idle
Bad Laws
Bad Bargain
Beauty and Strength of Simplicity.
Could Not Afford to Make Money
Direct While Appearing to Obey
Education
Endeavoring to Blow up a Storm That He May Ride upon
Events Control Me; I Cannot Control Events
Falsehood
Farce
Father Abraham
Favor to Me Would Be Injustice to the Public
Fees We Earn at a Distance
Gals, Tied as Tight in the Middle
General Grant
Good, Bright, Passable Lie
His Parts Seemed to Be Raised by the Demands of Great Station
House Divided Against Itself Cannot Stand
I Can't Spare That Man, He Fights!
Idealization Which So Easily Runs into the Commonplace
If Slavery Is Not Wrong, Nothing Is Wrong
Ignored the Insult, but Firmly Established His Superiority
Inability to Say "No" as a Positive Weakness
Leave Us to Take Care of Ourselves
Let Us to the End Dare to Do Our Duty as We Understand It
Lincoln-Shields Duel
Lost Townships
Manifested His Courage to Stand Alone
Marriage,
Murder Case
National Bank
No Hanging after all
Not Meddling
Not One Slave or One Drunkard
Not Seldom Ragged, Usually Patched, and Always Shabby.
Not Appearing on the Appointed Wedding Day
One Long Step Removed from Honest Men
Patronizing If Not Contemptuous Condescension
Pay the Fiddler
Peace at Any Price Rose on All Sides
People Became Bound by a Genuine Sentimental Attachment
Plain People, Had to Furnish the Men for the Fighting
Political Smear
Posterity Has Done Nothing
President Polk
Professions Instead of Their Practices
Reorganization of the Judiciary
Revolutions Never Go Backward
Right Makes Might
Sale of Public Lands
Shift His Ground
Shortly You Are to Feel Well Again
Shut in with a Few Books and to Master Them Thoroughly
Silence Might Be Construed into a Confession
Silent Artillery of Time
Slavery
Sympathy Was the Strongest Element in His Nature
Take Advice with Candid Readiness
Taking Care to Cut His Expressions Close
Thought of Their Mind--articulated in His Tongue
Too Silly to Require Any Sort of Notice
Uncommon Power of Clear and Compact Statement
Voice Shrill and Piercing
Wear the Sweetest Idea Threadbare
Whom the Gods Wish to Destroy They First Make Mad
Widow v.s. Gen. Adams
You Work and Toil and Earn Bread and I'll Eat It





THE WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN, VOL 2
[Etext #2654] 2linc10.txt

Abolish Slavery in the District of Columbia
Abolition Movement
Abolition Societies as Far South as Virginia
All Agreed on this Except South Carolina and Georgia
Allowing the People to Do as They Please
Amalgamation
Apportionment
Argument of "Necessity"
Autobiography
Benefit Only a Portion of Them
Benefits of That Double Position
Bill Granting Lands to the States
Blood Will Flow on Account of Nebraska
British
Brother's Hands Will Be Raised Against Brother!
Compromise Whenever You Can
Compromises
Continental Congress
Counterfeit Logic
Crime to Tell Him That He Is Free!
Danger of Third-parties
Declaration of Independence
Declaring the African Slave Trade Piracy
Dirge of One Who Has No Title to Himself
Disunionists
Dred Scott
Equality
Evasive with His Wife
Execrable Commerce
Father's Request for Money
Free All the Slaves, and Send Them to Liberia
Fugitive Slave Law
General of Splendidly Successful Charges
Government Was Made for the White People
Henry Clay
Hypocracy
Improvements
Inform a Negro of His Legal Rights
Interested Faultfinders
Just Leave Her Alone
Kings
Let the Slavery of the Other States Alone
Letters to Family Members
Locos
Loss of Primary for Senator
Mexico
Missouri Compromise
Mixing of Blood by the White and Black Races
Moderation
Mulattoes
National Bank
Nebraska Measure
Need Not Have Her for Either--I Can Just Leave Her Alone
Never Stir up Litigation
No Law, Is Free Law!
No Man can be Silent if He Would
Only One Vote, and That from New York, Was Against it
Opportunities for Young Politicians
Out-of-state Campaigners
Peoria Speech
Political Appointments
Political Jealousy
Politically and Socially Our Equals
Proneness of Prosperity to Breed Tyrants
Refund of Legal Charges
Repeal of the Missouri Compromise
Republican Position
Request for a Patent
Request for a Railway Pass
Request for General Land-Office Appointment
Response to a Pro-slavery Friend
Return to Law Profession
Revolutions Do Not Go Backward
Sacred Right of Self-government
Second Child
Should Be Permitted to Keep the Little He Has
Slave-traders
Slavery Can Only Be Maintained by Force--by Violence
Slavery Was Recognized, by South and North Alike, as an Evil
Squatter or Popular Sovereignty
Stand with Anybody That Stands Right
Sumner
Superior Race
Suspicion
Third-parties
Those Who Deny Freedom to Others
Victory of Buchanan
We Cannot Then Make Them Equals
We Do Not Want to Dissolve the Union; You Shall Not.
We Won't Go out of the Union, and You Shan't!
Whipped
Wilmot Proviso
You Are Not Lazy, and Still You Are an Idler.





THE WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN, VOL 3
[Etext #2655] 3linc10.txt

Affirmative Charge, He must Offer Some Proof
Bread That His Own Hands Have Earned
Brooks, of South Carolina
Circumstantial Evidence
Conspiracy to Perpetuate and Nationalize Slavery
Cotton Gin
Counterfeit Logic
Course of Ultimate Extinction
Distinction Between a Purpose and an Expectation
Dred Scott
Extremely Good Name since it Has Passed Away
First Joint Debate, at Ottawa
Fugitive Slave Law
Gingerbread
God Gave Him but Little, That Little Let Him Enjoy
Government Cannot Endure Permanently Half Slave and Half Free
Henry Clay
House Divided Against Itself Cannot Stand
If You Do Not like Him, Let Him Alone
In the Course of Ultimate Extinction
Institution of Slavery in the States Where it Exists
It Will Become All One Thing, or All the Other
Kingcraft
Lincoln and Douglas Debates
Man Cannot Prove a Negative
Mexico
Nationalization of Slavery
Negro Cannot Make a Choice
No Legal Power to Choose
No Wrong Without its Remedy
People Were Better off for Being Ridden
Perfect an Understanding Without Talking as with It
Physical Difference Between the Two
Political Effects of Their Dead Adversaries
Popular Sovereignty
Probably Forever Forbid Their Living Together
Public Sentiment
Quibbles
Repentance Before Forgiveness
Republican Position
Right to Eat the Bread He Earns
Second Joint Debate, at Freeport
Set the Niggers and White People to Marrying
Short of a Clear Popular Majority
Smallest Are Often the Most Difficult Things to Deal with
Social and Political Equality with the Negro
Squatter Sovereignty
Superior Position
Taking Away the Little Which Has Been Given Him
Third Joint Debate at Jonesboro





THE WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN,  VOL 4
[Etext #2656] 4linc10.txt

Boiling the Shadow of a Pigeon That Had Starved to Death
Came Forward and Made a Virtue of Necessity
Common Right of Humanity
Constitution
Divine Right of Kings
Drowned Husband
Fifth Joint Debate
Fisherman's Wife
Forbids the Marrying of White People with Negroes
Forever Forbid the Two Races Living Together
Fourth Joint Debate
Frankly That I Am Not in Favor of Negro Citizenship
Get along Without Making Either Slaves or Wives of Negroes
Hard to Affirm a Negative
Homeopathic Soup
Inequality Between the White and Black Races
Invention of the Cotton-gin
Jefferson
Judges Are as Honest as Other Men, and Not More So
Just Let Her Alone
Last Joint Debate
Men Interested to Misunderstand
Must Be the Position of Superior and Inferior
Must Necessarily Want Her for a Wife
Negro Citizenship
Perpetuation of the Institution of Slavery a Necessity
Requires Us to Make Them Our Wives
Sixth Joint Debate
Slavery Shall Last Forever
Taking an Issue upon the Meaning of the Words
Trembled for His Country
You Work and Toil and Earn Bread, and I'll Eat It





THE WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN,  VOL 5
[Etext #2657] 5linc10.txt

Abolishing Slavery in Washington, D.C.
Abraham or "Abram"
Acceptance of Nomination as Republican Candidate  for President
Accusation of Having Been Paid for a Political Speech
Act in Such a Manner as to Create No Bad Feeling
Agriculture
American Party
Armed Neutrality
As Everywhere Else, Nothing Can Be Done
As I Would Not Be a Slave, So I Would Not Be a Master.
Asking Cabinet Opinions on Fort Sumter
Attempt to Form and Coalition Cabinet
Bankruptcy
Blocking "Compromise" on Slavery Issue
Bull Run Defeat
Capital and Labor
Cease to Call Slavery Wrong, and Join Them in Calling it Right
Coercion
Colonization
Communication with Vice-president
Compensated Emancipation
Condolence over Failure of Ft. Sumter Relief
Conservatism
Constitution Alludes to Slavery Three Times
Cooper Institute, New York
Crisis Is All Artificial
Crocodile
Curious Mystery about the Number of the Troops
Debates must Be Saved
Delay Is Ruining Us
Do Not Demand the Whole of this Just Now
Don't Care Whether it Be Voted up or down
Douglas's New Sedition Law
Early Information on Army Defection in South
Estimated as Mere Brutes--as Rightful Property
Explanations Explanatory of Explanations Explained
Familiarize Yourselves with the Chains of Bondage
Farewell Address at Springfield, Illinois,
First Inaugural Address
First Suggestion of Offer of Presidency
First Written Notice of Grant
Folly of Being the Beginners of a War
Form of Reply Prepared by Mr. Lincoln
Further Reprimand of McClellan
General Idea of this War
Germans and Foreigners
Give No Denial and No Explanation
Government Will Not Assail You
Gradual and Not Sudden Emancipation Is Better for All
Gradual and Steady Debauching of Public Opinion
Greatest Good to the Greatest Number
Groping for Some Middle Ground Between the Right and the Wrong
Gur-reat Pur-rinciple
Homestead Law
Horace Greeley
Horse Chestnut to Be a Chestnut Horse
I Authorize No Bargains and Will Be Bound by None
I Have Not Been to School since
I like the System Which Lets a Man Quit When He Wants to
I must Say I Do Not Think Myself Fit for the Presidency
I Shall Go to the Wall for Bread and Meat
If the Minority Will Not Acquiesce, the Majority must
Ills You Fly from Have No Real Existence
Immediate Dissolution or Blood
Insist That They Were Put up to it by Some Rascally Abolitionist
Intentions Toward the South
Is There in All Republics this Inherent and Fatal Weakness?
It Is Bad to Be Poor
It Is Exceedingly Discouraging
Jibes and Sneers in Place of Argument
John Brown
Join Now to Save the Good Old Ship of the Union
Keep Cool
Labor Is the Superior of Capital
Let it Alone and it Will Go down of Itself
Let Us Be Diverted by None of Those Sophistical Contrivances
Letter of Condolence to One of First Casualties
Letter of Reprimand to General Hunter
Letter Suggesting a Beard
Lincoln's Definition of Democracy
Lincoln's Election
Localized Repeal of Writ of Habeas Corpus
Malicious Slander
Merely a Matter of Dollars and Cents
Middle Ground Between the Right and the Wrong
Misrepresentation
More a Man Speaks the less He Is Understood
Mortgages
National Census
Negroes Are Men
No Attempt to Force Obnoxious Strangers among the People
No Conflict Without Being Yourselves the Aggressors
No Other Marks or Brands Recollected
Nomination to the National Ticket
Not Grudgingly, but Fully and Fairly
Nothing Valuable Can Be Lost by Taking Time
On Lincoln's Scrap Book
One Bad General Is Better than Two Good Ones
Opinion on Secession
Opposition to McClellan's Plans
Order to Defend from a Maryland Insurrection
Out of Money
Patronage Claims
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Placed Him Where the Ray of Hope Is Blown out
Political Prisoners
Popular Sovereignty
President's General War Order
Proclamation Calling for Volunteers,
Proclamation Calling for Militia
Proclamation Forbidding Intercourse with Rebel States
Proclamation of Blockade
Protective Tariffs
Public Opinion in this Country Is Everything
Refusal of Seward Resignation
Relief Expedition for Fort Sumter
Remarks to a Military Company, Washington
Repeal of the Fugitive Slave Law
Reply to Secretary Seward's Memorandum
Republican Position
Republicans, on the Contrary, Are for Both the Man and the Dollar
Respite for Nathaniel Gordon
Response to an Elector's Request for Money
Right Makes Might
Rise up and Preserve the Union and Liberty
Running for Election
Say Nothing Insulting or Irritating
Secession Is the Essence of Anarchy
Sectional Party
Senate Inquiry Re. Fort Sumter
Seward's Bid for Power
Shoe Strike
Silence Will Not Be Tolerated
Slow to Listen to Criminations
Solomon Says There Is "A Time to Keep Silence"
Some Forts Surrrendered to the South
Spoken of among Reptiles and Crocodiles
Support of the Fugitive Slave Clause
Suppressing All Declarations That Slavery Is Wrong
Suspending the Writ of Habeas Corpus in Florida
Taking Slaves into New Territories
Telegram to General Fremont,
That the Federal Union must Be Preserved.
The Fight must Go on
Their Thinking it Right and Our Thinking it Wrong
Travel to Washington D.c.
Treason
Two Sons Who Want to Work
Unauthorized Biography
Union of These States Is Perpetual
Venomous Snake
Wanting to Work Is So Rare a Want
What Is a State
When I Came of Age I Did Not Know Much
Wisely Given Their Public Servants but Little Power for Mischief
Wish No Explanation Made to Our Enemies
Wrangle by the Mouth
You must Stop Thinking Slavery Wrong!





THE WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN,  VOL 6
[Etext #2658] 6linc10.txt

Act of Compensated Emancipation
Advantage
Aid to Mrs. Helm, Mrs. Lincoln's Sister
Announcement of News from Gettysburg.
Ask of You Military Success, and I Will Risk the Dictatorship
Blockade
Broken Eggs Cannot Be Mended
Call for Militia to Serve for Six Months
Colonization
Compensated Emancipation,
Confiscation Act
Conspiracy of Rebellion
Continued Failure to Pursue Enemy
Delaying Tactics of Generals
Divine Will
Does Not Admit of Holidays
Don't Think it Will Do Him a Bit of Good Either
Emancipation
Emancipation Proclamation,
Escape History
Executing  Indians
Experiment of Negotiation
Factional Quarrels
Farragut
Fitz-John Porter Court-martial
Fredericksburg
Further Democratic Party Criticism
General Grant Is a Copious Worker
General McClellans Tired Horses
Generals Lost
Government Needed a Dictator
Grant--Very Meager Writer or Telegrapher
Grant's Exclusion of a Newspaper Reporter
Greeley
Habeas Corpus
History of Conspiracy of Rebellion
Hold My Hand Whilst the Enemy Stabs Me
Holidays
I Am Not Quite Satisfied with You
If Both Factions, or Neither, Shall Abuse You
Ignored the Evils and Magnified the Necessity
Ignored the Necessity and Magnified the Evils of the System
Interview Between the President and General McClellan
Jews
Lee's Army, and Not Richmond, Is Your True Objective Point
Let the Military Obey Orders
Likely to Capture the "Man in the Moon"
Military Strategy
Mrs. Lincoln's Rebel Brother-in-law Killed
Needs New Tires on His Carriage
Negotiation
Negro Troops
News of Grant's Capture of Vicksburg
Order Constituting the Army of Virginia.
Order Expelling All Jews from Your Department
Order Making Halleck General-in-chief.
Order of Retaliation
Order Relieving General G. B. McClellan
Ox Jumped Half over a Fence
Pardoned
Pay and Send Substitutes
Political Motivated Misquotation in Newspaper
Pope's Bull Against the Comet
Preliminary Emancipation Proclamation
Printing Money
Proclamation Concerning Taxes
Proclamation Recalling  Soldiers to Their Regiments
Prohibiting the Export of Arms
Remembered in Spite of Ourselves
Request to Suggest Name for a Baby
Response to a "Besieged" General
Sabbath
Self-reliance
Son in College Does Not Write His Parents
Statehood for West Virginia
Stocks Have Declined
Substitutes
Taking Military Possession of Railroads
The Animal must Be Very Slim Somewhere
To Critics of Emancipation
To General U.S. Grant.
Treaty with Mexico
Vanderbilt
What I Deal with Is Too Vast for Malicious Dealing
Who Has the Right Needs Not to Fear
Will Not Fight to Free Negroes
You Were Right and I Was Wrong





THE WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN,  VOL 7
[Etext #2659] 7linc10.txt

Address at Gettysburg
Address to General Grant,
Agreeably and Profitably Disappointed
All Know is Where He Went in At
And the War Came
Announcement Concerning Terms of Peace
Announcement of Union Success in East Tennessee
Annual Message to Congress
Another Female Spy
Bad Promises Are Better Broken than Kept
Better for Their Own Good than If They Had Been Successful
Blood Drawn with the Lash Shall Be Paid by Another
Call for Two Hundred Thousand Men.
Can't Tell Where He Will Come out At
Cannot Conciliate the South
Cannot Fly from My Thoughts
Capture of the City of Atlanta
Chew and Choke as Much as Possible
Christmas Gift, the Capture of Savannah
Chronologic Review of Peace Proposals
Colored Colony
Constitutional Amendment for the Abolishing of Slavery
Deserters Sentences Remitted to Hard Labor
Early Consultations with Rebels
Emancipation
Exemption of  American Consuls from Military Service
Female Spy
First Overtures for Surrender from Davis
Five-star Mother
Fort Pillow Massacre
Four Score and Seven Years Ago
Gettysburg
Gratuitous Hostility
Greenback
Habeas Corpus
Harmon's Sandal Sock
Hawaiian Islands
Indians
Irresponsible Newspaper Reporters and Editors
Keep Cool
Kindness Not Quite Free from Ridicule
Labor
Last Public Address
Lecture on Liberty
Letter Accepting the Nomination for President.
Lieutenant-general of the Army of the United States
Malice Toward None, with Charity for All,
Many Arguments Why the Negroes Ought to Be Slaves
Massacre of Three Hundred Colored Soldiers
Mother of Five Sons Who Have Died
Must Not Force Negroes Any More than White Men
Nevada into the Union
Never Could Learn of His Giving Much Attention
Newspaper Reporters and Editors
Not Best to Swap Horses When Crossing a Stream
Not Be Much Oppressed by a Debt Which They Owe to Themselves
On Democratic Government
On Disloyal Family Member
Order Concerning the Export of Tobacco
Order for a Draft of Five Hundred Thousand Men
Platform of the Union National Convention
Probable That this Administration Will Not Be Re-elected
Proclamation Concerning Indians
Proclamation about Amnesty
Proclamation of Amnesty and Reconstruction
Proclamation Offering Pardon to Deserters,
Renomination
Republican National Convention
Richmond Is in Our Hands, and I Think I Will Go There To-morrow
Ridicule
Second Inaugural Address,
Sentence of Deserters.
Sheep and the Wolf Are Not Agreed
Sherman's March to the Sea
Slaves Are Now in the United States Military Service
Some Deference Shall Be Paid to the Will of the Majority
Story of the Emancipation Proclamation
Strikes
Suspending the Writ of Habeas Corpus
Thanks for Your Caution
That Some Should Be Rich Shows That Others May Become Rich
Too Lazy to Be Anything but a Lawyer
War at the Best Is Terrible
We Accepted this War, and Did Not Begin it
World Has Never Had a Good Definition of the Word Liberty
Would Make War Rather than Let the Nation Survive
Would Accept War Rather than Let it Perish





THE ENTIRE WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN,
[Etext #3253]  lnent10.txt

100,000 slaves are now in the United States military service
Abolishing slavery in Washington, DC
Abraham or "Abram"
Act in such a manner as to create no bad feeling
Address at Gettysburg
Address to General Grant
Affected contempt of refinement
All know where he went in at; can't tell where he will come out at
All agreed on this except South Carolina and Georgia
And the war came
As I would not be a slave, so I would not be a master
Ask of you is military success, and I will risk the dictatorship
Bad promises are better broken than kept
Better for their own good than if they had been successful
Boiling the shadow of a pigeon that had starved to death
Bread that his own hands have earned
Came forward and made a virtue of necessity
Circumstantial evidence
Colonization
Common right of humanity
Compensated Emancipation
Conspiracy to perpetuate and nationalize slavery
Constitution alludes to slavery three times
Constitutional Amendment for the Abolishing of Slavery
Cotton gin
Could not afford to make money
Counterfeit logic
Counterfeit logic
Crime to tell him that he is free!
Danger of third-parties
Declaration of Independence
Declaring the African slave trade piracy
Direct while appearing to obey
Dirge of one who has no title to himself
Distinction between a purpose and an expectation
Don't think it will do him a bit of good either
Dred Scott
Dred Scott
Early Consultations with Rebels
Emancipation Proclamation
Emancipation
Endeavoring to blow up a storm that he may ride upon
Estimated as mere brutes--as rightful property
Events control me; I cannot control events
Explanations explanatory of explanations explained
Familiarize yourselves with the chains of bondage
Father's request for money
Female Spy
First Inaugural Address
First Overtures for Surrender from Davis
Five-star Mother
Forbids the marrying of white people with negroes
Forever forbid the two races living together
Fort Pillow Massacre
Four Score and Seven Years Ago
Frankly that I am not in favor of negro citizenship
Free all the slaves, and send them to Liberia
Fugitive Slave law
Further Democratic Party Criticism
General Grant is a copious worker
General McClellan's Tired Horses
General Grant
Get along without making either slaves or wives of negroes
Gingerbread
God gave him but little, that little let him enjoy
Government cannot endure permanently half slave and half free
Government was made for the white people
Grant--very meager writer or telegrapher
Grant's Exclusion of a Newspaper Reporter
Gratuitous Hostility
Greeley
Hard to affirm a negative
Henry Clay
House divided against itself cannot stand
I can't spare that man, he fights!
I must say I do not think myself fit for the Presidency
I authorize no bargains and will be bound by none
I shall go to the wall for bread and meat
I like the system which lets a man quit when he wants to
Idealization which so easily runs into the commonplace
If the minority will not acquiesce, the majority must
If slavery is not wrong, nothing is wrong
If you do not like him, let him alone
Ills you fly from have no real existence
In the course of ultimate extinction
Irresponsible Newspaper Reporters and Editors
Is there in all republics this inherent and fatal weakness?
It is bad to be poor
Jews
Jibes and sneers in place of argument
Judges are as honest as other men, and not more so
Just leave her alone
Last Public Address
Lee's army, and not Richmond, is your true objective point
Letter Suggesting a Beard
Lincoln's Definition of Democracy
Lincoln's Election
Localized Repeal of Writ of Habeas Corpus
Malice Toward None, with Charity for All
Man cannot prove a negative
Massacre of Three Hundred Colored Soldiers
Men interested to misunderstand
Mexico
Middle ground between the right and the wrong??
Missouri Compromise
Mixing of blood by the white and black races
More a man speaks the less he is understood
Mother of Five Sons Who Have Died
Mrs. Lincoln's Rebel Brother-in-law Killed
Need not have her for either I can just leave her alone
Needs New Tires on His Carriage
Negro Troops
Never stir up litigation
News of Grant's Capture of Vicksburg
No wrong without its remedy
No man can be silent if he would
Not appearing on the appointed wedding day
Not Be Much Oppressed by a Debt Which They Owe to Themselves
Not seldom ragged, usually patched, and always shabby
Not Best to Swap Horses When Crossing a Stream
Nothing valuable can be lost by taking time
One long step removed from honest men
Order expelling all Jews from your department
Order of Retaliation
Ox jumped half over a fence
Pardoned
Patronizing if not contemptuous condescension
Pay and send substitutes
Peace at any price rose on all sides
Printing Money
Probably forever forbid their living together
Public opinion in this country is everything
Repeal of the Missouri Compromise
Repeal of the Fugitive Slave Law
Repentance before forgiveness
Reply to Secretary Seward's Memorandum
Revolutions never go backward
Revolutions do not go backward
Right to eat the bread he earns
Right makes might
Secession is the essence of anarchy
Second Inaugural Address,
Sentence of Deserters
Seward's Bid for Power
Sherman's March to the Sea
Should be permitted to keep the little he has
Slave-traders
Slavery was recognized, by South and North alike, as an evil
Smallest are often the most difficult things to deal with
Story of the Emancipation Proclamation
Strikes
Suppressing all declarations that slavery is wrong
Take advice with candid readiness
Taking care to cut his expressions close
That Some Should Be Rich Shows That Others May Become Rich
The animal must be very slim somewhere
Thought of their mind--articulated in his tongue
Too Lazy to Be Anything but a Lawyer
Too silly to require any sort of notice
Trembled for his country
Two Sons Who Want to Work
Uncommon power of clear and compact statement
Wanting to work is so rare a want
War at the Best Is Terrible
We Accepted this War, and Did Not Begin it
We do not want to dissolve the Union; you shall not
What I deal with is too vast for malicious dealing
Who has the right needs not to fear
Whom the gods wish to destroy they first make mad
Wilmot Proviso
Wisely given their public servants but little power for mischief
World Has Never Had a Good Definition of the Word Liberty
Would Make War Rather than Let the Nation Survive
Would Accept War Rather than Let it Perish
You work and toil and earn bread, and I'll eat it
You were right and I was wrong
You work and toil and earn bread and I'll eat it
You are not lazy, and still you are an idler







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WIDGER'S QUOTATIONS FROM THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EDITIONS OF THE WORKS OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


