The Project Gutenberg eBook of Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 20
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 20

Author: Jean de La Fontaine


        
Release date: March 1, 2004 [eBook #5294]
                Most recently updated: December 28, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/5294

Credits: This eBook was produced by David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 20 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger





                       THE TALES AND NOVELS
                                OF
                        J. DE LA FONTAINE



          Volume 20.

          Contains:
             The Devil in Hell
             Neighbor Peter's Mare



                       THE DEVIL IN HELL


          HE surely must be wrong who loving fears;
          And does not flee when beauty first appears.
          Ye FAIR, with charms divine, I know your fame;
          No more I'll burn my fingers in the flame.
          From you a soft sensation seems to rise,
          And, to the heart, advances through the eyes;
          What there it causes I've no need to tell:
          Some die of love, or languish in the spell.
          Far better surely mortals here might do;
          There's no occasion dangers to pursue.
          By way of proof a charmer I will bring,
          Whose beauty to a hermit gave the sting:
          Thence, save the sin, which fully I except;
          A very pleasant intercourse was kept;
          Except the sin, again I must repeat,
          My sentiments on this will never meet
          The taste of him at Rome, who wine had swilled,
          Till, to the throat, he thoroughly was filled,
          And then exclaimed, is't not a sin to drink?
          Such conduct horrid ever I shall think;
          I wish to prove, e'en saints in fear should live;
          The truth is clear:--our faults may Heav'n forgive;
          If dread of punishment, from pow'rs divine,
          Had led this friar in the proper line,
          He never had the charming girl retained,
          Who, young and artless, would your heart have gained.

          HER name was Alibech, if I recollect;
          Too innocent, deceptions to detect.
          One day this lovely maiden having read,
          How certain pious, holy saints were led,
          The better to observe religious care,
          To seek retirement in some lorn repair,
          Where they, like Heav'nly Angels, moved around,
          Some here, some there, were in concealment found,
          Was quite delighted, strange as it may seem,
          And presently she formed the frantick scheme,
          Of imitating those her mind revered,
          And to her plan most rigidly adhered.

          WITH silent steps the innocent withdrew;
          To mothers, sisters,--none she bade adieu.
          Long time she walked through fields, and plain, and dale;
          At length she gained a wood within a vale;
          There met an aged man, who once might be,
          Gay, airy, pleasing, blithe, gallant, and free,
          But now a meagre skeleton was seen
          The shadow only of what late he'd been:
          Said she, good father, I have much desire
          To be a saint: thither my hopes aspire;
          I fain would merit reverence and prayer,
          A festival have kept with anxious care;
          What pleasure, ev'ry year, the palm in hand,
          And, beaming round the head, a holy band,
          Nice presents, flow'rs, and off'rings to receive
          Your practice difficult must I believe?
          Already I can fast for many days,
          And soon should learn to follow all your ways.
          Go, said the aged man, your plan resign;
          I'd have you, as a friend, the state decline;
          'Tis not so easy sanctity to meet,
          That fasting should suffice the boon to greet.
          Heav'n guards from ill the maids and wives who fast,
          Or holiness would very seldom last.
          'Tis requisite to practise other things;
          These secrets are, which move by hidden springs;
          A hermit, whom you'll find beneath yon' beech,

          Can, better far than I, their virtues teach;
          Go, seek him, pray, make haste if you are sage;
          I ne'er retain such birds within my cage.
          This having said, at once he left the belle,
          And wisely shut the door, and barred his cell:
          Not trusting hair-cloth, fasting, age, nor gout;
          With beauty, anchorites themselves should doubt.

          OUR pensive fair soon found the person meant,
          A man whose soul was on religion bent;
          His name was Rustick, young and warm in prayer;
          Such youthful hermits of deception share.
          Her holy wish, the girl to him expressed,
          A wish most fervent doubtless to be blessed,
          And felt so strongly, Alibech had fear,
          Some day the mark might on her fruit appear.

          A SMILE her innocence from Rustick drew;
          Said he, in me you little learning view;
          But what I've got, I'll readily divide,
          And nothing from your senses try to hide.

          THE hermit surely would have acted right;
          Such pupil to have sent away at sight.
          He managed otherwise, as we shall state;
          The consequences, let us now relate.

          SINCE much he wished perfection to pursue;
          He, to himself, exclaimed: what can'st thou do?
          Watch, fast, and pray; wear hair-cloth too; but this
          Is surely little that will lead to bliss;
          All do as much, but with a FAIR to dwell,
          And, never touch her, would be to excel;
          'Twere triumph 'mong the Heav'nly Angels thought;
          Let's merit it, and keep what here is brought;
          If I resist a thing so sweet and kind,
          I gain the end that pow'rs divine designed.

          HE with him let the charming belle remain;
          And confident he could at will abstain,
          Both Satan and the flesh at once defied:
          Two foes on mischief ready to decide.

          BEHOLD our saints together in a hut;
          Young Rustick, where a corner seemed to jut;
          A bed of rushes for the novice placed,
          Since sleeping on the floor had her debased,
          Who, yet unused to hardships, much must feel:
          'Twas best that these should on her senses steal.
          A little fruit, and bread not over fine,
          She had for supper:--water too for wine.
          The hermit fasted; but the lady fed,
          And ate with appetite her fruit and bread.

          APART their place of rest, the maiden slept,
          But something quite awake the other kept:
          The Devil could by no means quiet rest,
          Till he should get admitted as a guest.
          He was received within the humble cell;
          The friar's thoughts were on his smiling belle,
          Her simple manners, fascinating grace,
          Complexion, age; each feature he would trace;
          The heaving bosom, and the beauteous charms;
          That made him wish to clasp her in his arms.

          BY passion moved, he bade at once adieu,
          To hair-cloth, discipline, and fasting too;
          Cried he, my saints are these; to them I'll pray;
          From Alibech no longer he would stay,
          But to her flew, and roused the girl from sleep:
          Said he, so soon you should not silence keep,
          It is not right:--there's something to be done,
          Ere we suspend the converse we've begun:
          'Tis proper that, to please the pow'rs divine;
          We Satan instantly in Hell confine;
          He was created for no other end;
          To block him up let's ev'ry effort lend.

          IMMEDIATELY within the bed he slid,
          When, scarcely knowing what young Rustick did;
          And, unaccustomed to the mystick scene,
          She knew not what the anchorite could mean,
          Nor this nor that but, partly by consent,
          And partly force, yet wishing to prevent,
          Though not presuming to resist his sway
          To him 'mid pain and pleasure, she gave way,
          Believing ev'ry thing was most exact,
          And, what the saint performed, a gracious act,
          By thus the Devil shutting up in Hell,
          Where he was destined with his imps to dwell.

          HENCEFORTH 'twas requisite, if saint she'd be;
          From martyrdom she must not think to flee,
          For friar Rustick little sought to please:
          The lesson was not given quite at ease,
          Which made the girl (not much improved in wit)
          Exclaim, this Devil mischief will commit;
          'Tis very plain, though strange it may appear
          To hurt his prison e'en he'll persevere;
          The injury now you clearly may perceive;
          But, for the evil done, I shall not grieve:
          Yet richly he deserves to be again
          Shut up effectually in his domain.

          IT shall be so, the anchorite replied;
          Once more the mystick art was fully tried;
          Such care he took, such charity was shown,
          That Hell, by use, free with the Devil grown,
          His presence pleasant always would have found;
          Could Rustick equally have kept his ground.

          CRIED Alibech, 'tis very truly said,
          No prison has so nice and soft a bed,
          But presently the host will weary grow;
          And here our pair soon discord seemed to show:
          Hell, for the prisoner, in vain inquired;
          Deaf was the fiend, and quietly retired;
          Repeated calls of course must irksome prove:
          The fair grew weary, when he would not move;
          Her strong desire to be a saint declined;
          And Rustick to get rid of her designed;
          In this with him the belle agreed so well,
          That secretly she left the hermit's cell,
          And home returned in haste the shortest way;
          But what the fair could to her parents say,
          Is what I fain would know, though truly yet;
          The full particulars I ne'er could get.
          'Tis probable she made them understand,
          Her heart was prompted by divine command;
          To try to be a saint; that they believed,
          Or seemingly for truth the tale received.
          Perhaps the parents were not quite exact,
          In narrowly examining the fact;
          Though some suspicions doubtless might arise
          About her Hell, they could not well disguise;
          But 'tis so formed that little can be seen,
          And many jailors in it duped have been.

          FOR Alibech great feasting was prepared,
          When, through simplicity, the girl declared,
          To those around, without the least restraint,
          How she had acted to be made a saint.
          You'd surely no occasion, they replied,
          To go so far instruction to provide,
          When at your house you might have had, with ease,
          Like secret lectures, just as you should please.
          Said one, my brother could the thing have done;
          Another cried,--my cousin would have run
          To do the same; or Neherbal, who's near,
          No novice in the business would appear;
          He seeks your hand, which you'll be wise to take
          Before he learns--what might a diff'rence make.
          She took the hint, and he the fair received;
          A handsome fortune many fears relieved;
          This joined to num'rous charms that had the belle;
          He fancied pure a most suspicious Hell,
          And freely used the blessings Hymen sends;
          May Heav'n like joys bestow on all our friends!






                      NEIGHBOUR PETER'S MARE


          A CERTAIN pious rector (John his name),
          But little preached, except when vintage came;
          And then no preparation he required
          On this he triumphed and was much admired.
          Another point he handled very well,
          Though oft'ner he'd thereon have liked to dwell,
          And this the children of the present day,
          So fully know, there's naught for me to say:
          John to the senses things so clearly brought,
          That much by wives and husbands he was sought,
          Who held his knowledge of superior price,
          And paid attention to his sage advice.
          Around, whatever conscience he might find,
          To soft delights and easy ways inclined,
          In person he would rigidly attend,
          And seek to act the confessor and friend;
          Not e'en his curate would he trust with these;
          But zealously he tried to give them ease,
          And ev'ry where would due attention show,
          Observing that divines should always know
          Their flocks most thoroughly and visit round;
          To give instruction and the truth expound.

          AMONG the folks, to whom he visits paid,
          Was neighbour Peter, one who used the spade;
          A villager that God, in lieu of lands,
          Had furnished only with a pair of hands,
          To dig and delve, and by the mattock gain
          Enough his wife and children to maintain.
          Still youthful charms you in his spouse might trace;
          The weather injured solely had her face,
          But not the features which were perfect yet:
          Some wish perhaps more blooming belles to get;
          The rustick truly me would ne'er have pleased;
          But such are oft by country parsons seized,
          Who low amours and dishes coarse admire,
          That palates more refined would not desire.

          THE pastor John would often on her leer,
          just as a cur, when store of bones are near,
          That would good pickings for his teeth afford,
          Attentively behold the precious hoard,
          And seem uneasy; move his feet and tail;
          Now prick his ears; then fear he can't prevail,
          The eyes still fixed upon the bite in sight,
          Which twenty times to these affords delight,
          Ere to his longing jaws the boon arrives,
          However anxiously the suitor strives.

          SELF-TORMENTS solely parson John obtained;
          By seeing her that o'er his senses reigned.
          The village-wife was innocent of this,
          And never dreamed of any thing amiss;
          The pastor's mystick looks, nor flatt'ring ways;
          Nor presents, aught in Magdalene could raise;
          But nosegays made of thyme, and marj'ram too,
          Were dropt on ground, or never kept in view;
          A hundred little cares appeared as naught
          'Twas Welch to her, and ne'er conveyed a thought.
          A pleasant stratagem he now contrived,
          From which, he hoped, success might be derived.

          MOST clearly Peter was a heavy lout,
          Yet truly I could never have a doubt,
          That rashly he would ne'er himself commit,
          Though folly 'twere from him to look for wit,
          Or aught expect by questioning to find
          'Yond this to reason, he was not designed.

          THE rector to him said, thou'rt poor, my friend,
          And hast not half enough for food to spend,
          With other things that necessary prove,
          If we below with comfort wish to move.
          Some day I'll show thee how thou may'st procure
          The means that will thy happiness insure,
          And make thee feel contented as a king.
          To me what present for it wilt thou bring?

          ZOOKS! Peter answered, parson, I desire,
          You'll me direct to do as you require;
          My labour pray command; 'tis all I've got;
          Our pig howe'er to you we can allot,
          We want it not; and truly it has eat
          More bran than thrice this vessel would complete;
          The cow you'll take besides, from which my wife
          A calf expects, to raise the means of life.
          No, no, the pastor with a smile replied,
          A recompense for this thou'lt not provide;
          My neighbour to oblige is all I heed;
          And now I'll tell thee how thou must proceed;
          Thy spouse, by magick, I'll transform each day,
          And turn her to a mare for cart or dray,
          And then again restore her ev'ry night,
          To human form to give thy heart delight.
          From this to thee great profit will arise;
          Thy ass, so slow is found, that when supplies,
          It carries to the market, 'tis so late,
          The hour is almost past ere at the gate,
          And then thy cabbages, and herbs, and roots,
          Provisions, provender, and wares and fruits,
          Remain unsold, and home to spoil are brought,
          Since rarely far from thence such things are sought.
          But when thy wife's a mare, she'll faster go:
          Strong, active, ev'ry way her worth she'll show,
          And home will come without expense in meat:
          No soup nor bread, but solely herbs she'll eat:

          SAID Peter, parson, clearly you are wise;
          From learning, what advantages arise!
          Is this pray sold?--If I'd much money got,
          To make the purchase I'd the cash allot.

          CONTINUED John:--now I will thee instruct,
          The proper manner, matters to conduct,
          For thee to have a clever mare by day,
          And still at night a charming wife survey;
          Face, legs, and ev'ry thing shall reappear;
          Come, see it done, and I'll perform it here;
          Thou'lt then the method fully comprehend;
          But hold thy tongue, or all will quickly end:
          A single word the magick would dispel,
          And, during life, no more with us 'twould dwell.
          Keep close thy mouth and merely ope' thy eyes:
          A glimpse alone to learn it will suffice;
          This o'er, thyself shall practise it the same,
          And all will follow as when first it came.

          THE husband promised he would hold his tongue;
          And John disliked deferring matters long.
          Come, Magdalene, said he, you will undress;
          To quit those Sunday-clothes, you'll acquiesce,
          And put yourself in Nature's pure array
          Well, well, proceed; with stays and sleeves away;
          That's better still; now petticoats lay by;
          How nicely with my orders you comply.

          WHEN Magdalene was to the linen come,
          Some marks of shame around her senses swum;
          A wife to live and die was her desire,
          Much rather than be seen in Eve's attire;
          She vowed that, spite of what the priest disclosed;
          She never would consent to be exposed.

          SAID Peter, pretty work, upon my truth:--
          Not let us see how you are made forsooth!
          What silly scruples!--Are they in your creed?
          You were not always led such scenes to heed:
          Pray how d'ye manage when for fleas you seek?
          'Tis strange, good sir, that she should be so weak;
          What can you fear?--'tis folly time to waste;
          He will not eat you: come, I say, make haste:
          Have done with haggling; had you acted right,
          Ere now the parson all had finished quite.

          ON saying this, her garment off he took;
          Put on his spectacles to overlook;
          And parson John, without delay, began;
          Said he (as o'er her person now he ran),
          This part umbilical will make the mare
          A noble breast, and strength at once declare:
          Then further on the pastor placed his hand,
          While, with the other, (as a magick wand,)
          He set about transforming mounts of snow;
          That in our climes a genial warmth bestow,
          And semi-globes are called, while those that rise
          In t'other hemisphere, of larger size,
          Are seldom mentioned, through respect no doubt,
          But these howe'er the parson, quite devout,
          Would not neglect, and whatsoe'er he felt,
          He always named, and on its beauties dwelt;
          The ceremony this, it seems, required,
          And fully ev'ry movement John admired.

          PROCEEDINGS so minute gave Peter pain,
          And as he could not see the rector gain
          The slightest change, he prayed the pow'rs divine,
          To give assistance to the priest's design;
          But this was vain, since all the magick spell,
          In metamorphosing the lady well,
          Depended on the fixing of the tail;
          Without this ornament the whole would fail.

          To set it on the parson hastened now,
          When Neighbour Peter 'gan to knit his brow,
          And bawled so loud, you might have heard him far:
          No tail, said he, I'll have: there'll be a scar;
          You put it on too low; but vain his cries,
          The husband's diligence would not suffice,
          For, spite of ev'ry effort, much was done,
          And John completely his career had run,
          If Peter had not pulled the rector's gown,
          Who hastily replied, thou ninny, clown;
          Did I not tell thee silence to observe,
          And not a footstep from thy station swerve?
          The whole is spoiled, insufferable elf!
          And for it thou hast got to thank thyself.

          THE husband, while the holy pastor spoke,
          Appeared to grumble and his stars invoke.
          The wife was in a rage, and 'gan to scold:
          Said she to Peter, wretch that I behold!
          Thou'lt be through life a prey to pain and grief,
          Come not to me and bray and hope relief,
          The worthy pastor would have us procured
          The means that might much comfort have ensured.
          Can he deserve such treatment to receive?
          Good Mister John this goose I now would leave,
          And ev'ry morning, while he gathers fruits,
          Or plants, herbs, cabbages, and various roots,
          Without averting him, pray, here repair,
          You'll soon transform me to a charming mare.

          No mare, replied the husband, I desire;
          An ass for me is all that I require.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 20 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


