The Project Gutenberg eBook of Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 13
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 13

Author: Jean de La Fontaine


        
Release date: March 1, 2004 [eBook #5287]
                Most recently updated: December 28, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/5287

Credits: This eBook was produced by David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 13 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger





                       THE TALES AND NOVELS
                                OF
                        J. DE LA FONTAINE



          Volume 13.



                       ST. JULIAN'S PRAYER


          TO charms and philters, secret spells and prayers,
          How many round attribute all their cares!
          In these howe'er I never can believe,
          And laugh at follies that so much deceive.
          Yet with the beauteous FAIR, 'tis very true,
          These WORDS, as SACRED VIRTUES, oft they view;
          The spell and philter wonders work in love
          Hearts melt with charms supposed from pow'rs above!

          MY aim is now to have recourse to these,
          And give a story that I trust will please,
          In which Saint Julian's prayer, to Reynold D'Ast,
          Produced a benefit, good fortune classed.
          Had he neglected to repeat the charm,
          Believed so thoroughly to guard from harm,
          He would have found his cash accounts not right,
          And passed assuredly a wretched night.

          ONE day, to William's castle as he moved.
          Three men, whose looks he very much approved,
          And thought such honest fellows he had round,
          Their like could nowhere be discovered round;
          Without suspecting any thing was wrong,
          The three, with complaisance and fluent tongue,
          Saluted him in humble servile style,
          And asked, (the minutes better to beguile,)
          If they might bear him company the way;
          The honour would be great, and no delay;
          Besides, in travelling 'tis safer found,
          And far more pleasant, when the party's round;
          So many robbers through the province range,
          (Continued they) 'tis wonderfully strange,
          The prince should not these villains more restrain;
          But there:--bad MEN will somewhere still remain.

          TO their proposal Reynold soon agreed,
          And they resolved together to proceed.
          When 'bout a league the travellers had moved,
          Discussing freely, as they all approved,
          The conversation turned on spells and prayer,
          Their pow'r o'er worms of earth, or birds of air;
          To charm the wolf, or guard from thunder's roar,
          And many wonderful achievements more;
          Besides the cures a prayer would oft produce;
          To man and beast it proves of sov'reign use,
          Far greater than from doctors e'er you'll view,
          Who, with their Latin, make so much ado.

          IN turn, the three pretended knowledge great,
          And mystick facts affected to relate,
          While Reynold silently attention paid
          To all the words the honest fellows said:--
          Possess you not, said one, some secret prayer
          To bring you aid, when dangers round you stare?
          To this our Reynold seriously replied,
          Myself, on secret spells, I do not pride;
          But still some WORDS I have that I repeat,
          Each morn I travel, that I may not meet
          A horrid lodging where I stop at night;
          'Tis called SAINT JULIAN'S PRAYER that I recite,
          And truly I have found, that when I fail
          To say this prayer, I've reason to bewail.
          But rarely I neglect so good a thing,
          That ills averts, and may such blessings bring.
          And have you clearly said it, sir, to day?
          Cried one of those he met upon his way.
          Yes, Reynold answered.   Well, replied the Wight;
          I'll wage, I'm better lodged than you to-night.

          'TWAS very cold, and darkness 'gan to peep;
          The place was distant yet, where they might sleep.
          Perhaps, said Reynold, 'tis your usual care,
          In travelling, to say, like me, this prayer.
          Not so, the other cried, to you I vow,
          Invoking saints is not my practice now;
          But should I lose, thenceforth I'll them address.--
          Said Reynold, readily I acquiesce;
          My life I'd venture, should you to an inn,
          For, in the town, I've neither friend nor kin,
          And, if you like, we'll this exception make.
          The other answered: Well, the bet I'll take;
          Your horse and coat against my purse you wage,
          And, sure of gaining, readily engage.
          Our Wight might then have thoroughly perceived,
          His horse was lost--no chance to be relieved.

          BESIDE a wood, as on the party moved,
          The one, who betting had so much approved,
          Now changed his tone, and in a surly way,
          Exclaimed:--Alight--you'll find it time to pray;
          Let me apprize you, distant is the place,
          And much you'll need Saint Julian's special grace.
          Come off, I tell you:--instantly they took
          His purse, horse, clothes, and all their hands could hook
          E'en seized his boots, and said with subtle sneer,
          Your feet, by walking, won't the worse appear;
          Then sought a diff'rent road by rapid flight,
          And, presently the knaves were out of sight;
          While Reynold still with stockings, drawers, and shirt,
          But wet to skin, and covered o'er with dirt:
          (The wind north-east in front--as cold as clay;)
          In doleful dumps proceeded on his way,
          And justly feared, that spite of faith and prayer,
          He now should meet, at night, with wretched fare.

          HOWEVER, some pleasing hopes he still had yet,
          That, from his cloak-bag, he some clothes might get;
          For, we should note, a servant he had brought,
          Who in the neighbourhood a farrier sought.
          To set a shoe upon his horse, and then
          Should join his master on the road agen;
          But that, as we shall find, was not the case,
          And Reynold's dire misfortune thence we trace.
          In fact, the fellow, worthless we'll suppose,
          Had viewed from far what accidents arose,
          Then turned aside, his safety to secure,
          And left his master dangers to endure;
          So steadily be kept upon the trot,
          To Castle-William, ere 'twas night, he got,
          And took the inn which had the most renown;
          For fare and furniture within the town,
          There waited Reynold's coming at his ease,
          With fire and cheer that could not fail to please.
          His master, up to neck in dirt and wet,
          Had num'rous difficulties o'er to get;
          And when the snow, in flakes obscured the air,
          With piercing cold and winds, he felt despair;
          Such ills he bore, that hanging might be thought
          A bed of roses rather to be sought.
          CHANCE so arranges ev'ry thing around
          ALL good, or ALL that's bad is solely found;
          When favours flow the numbers are so great,
          That ev'ry wish upon us seems to wait;
          But, if disposed, misfortunes to bestow;
          No ills forgot: each poignant pang we know.
          In proof, attend my friends, this very night,
          The sad adventures that befell our wight,
          Who, Castle-William did not reach till late,
          When they, an hour or more, had shut the gate.

          AT length our traveller approached the wall,
          And, somehow to the foot contrived to crawl;
          A roofed projection fortune led him near,
          That joined a house, and 'gan his heart to cheer.
          Delighted with the change he now had got,
          He placed himself upon the sheltered spot;
          A lucky hit but seldom comes alone;
          Some straw, by chance, was near the mansion thrown,
          Which Reynold 'neath the jutting penthouse placed
          There, God be praised, cried he, a bed I've traced.

          MEANWHILE, the storm from ev'ry quarter pressed;
          Our traveller was soon to death distressed;
          With cold benumbed; by fell despair o'erspread;
          He trembled, groaned:--teeth chattered in his head;
          So loud his plaints, at length they reached the ear
          Of one who dwelled within the mansion near:
          A servant girl; her mistress brisk and gay:
          A youthful widow, charming as the day;
          The governor she privately received:
          A noble marquis, who her cares relieved.
          Oft interrupted when he sought the fair,
          And wished at ease her company to share;
          Desirous too of passing quite unknown,
          A private door he presently was shown,
          That opened to the fields, and gave access:
          Through this he visited with such address,
          That none within the town his commerce viewed,
          Nor e'en a servant's eye his course pursued.
          Surprise I feel, since pleasures of the mind,
          Apparently were not for lords designed;
          More pleased they seem when made the talk around
          And soft amours divulged, delights are found.

          IT happened that the night our Job arrived,
          And, stretched on straw, misfortune just survived,
          The lady thought her fond gallant to see,
          And ev'ry moment hoped with him to be.
          The supper ready, and the room prepared,
          Each rarity was served: no trouble spared;
          Baths, perfumes, wines, most exquisite, in place,
          And ev'ry thing around displaying grace,
          With Cupid's whole artillery in view,
          Not his, who would with sighs alone pursue,
          But that kind god who always favour shows,
          The source of happiness, whence pleasure flows.

          MEANWHILE, however, while thus the lady sought.
          By ev'ry charm to please, a note was brought;
          A page conveyed it, by the marquis sent,
          To say his coming business would prevent.
          The disappointment doubtless was severe,
          But consolation certainly was near;
          It proved to Reynold wonderfully kind,
          For scarcely had our traveller resigned,
          And groaned aloud, but, tender as her dame,
          In haste the confidential servant came,
          And to the widow said:--I hear below
          Some poor unfortunate o'ercome with woe;
          'Tis piercing cold, and he perhaps will die
          Some place, pray grant, where he to-night may lie.

          MOST readily, replied the courteous fair,
          We never use the garret:--lodge him there;
          Some straw upon a couch will make a bed,
          On which the wand'rer may repose his head;
          Shut well the door, but first provide some meat,
          And then permit him thither to retreat.

          WITHOUT this timely help 'twas clear our wight
          Had ne'er survived the horrors of the night;
          The door was ope'd, and Reynold blessed the hand
          That gave relief, and stopt life's ebbing sand.
          His tale he told; got spirits, strength, and ease;
          In person tall, well made, and formed to please,
          He looked not like a novice in amour,
          Though young, and seeking shelter at a door.
          His want of dress and miserable state
          Raised shame indeed, and showed distress was great.
          Though LOVE be seen in Nature's pure array,
          No dirt appears, however you survey.

          THIS servant girl now hastened to the fair,
          And ev'ry circumstance detailed with care.
          See, said the lady, if within the press
          There be not clothes to furnish him a dress;
          My husband, now no more, must some have left;
          Yes, said the girl, you're not of them bereft,
          I recollect his wardrobe did abound;
          And presently a handsome suit she found.

          MEANWHILE the lady having learned the name
          Of Reynold D'Ast, his quality and fame,
          (Himself it seems particulars detailed,
          While all around his suff'rings keen bewailed,)
          Her orders gave, the bath for her prepared
          Should now receive the man her care had spared.
          Unasked, the stranger this attention got,
          And well perfumed ere clothes they would allot.
          When dressed, he waited on the widow fair,
          And paid his compliments with graceful air.

          THE supper (for the marquis first designed)
          At length was served with taste the most refined.
          Our trav'ller glad, an appetite displayed;
          The lady carefully her guest surveyed,
          And anxious seemed to gratify his wish,
          By helping what appeared his favourite dish.
          Already, perhaps, she felt a Cupid's dart,
          And in her throbbing bosom knew the smart;
          Or sympathy, or pity for his woes,
          Might touch the spring whence softest passion flows.
          On ev'ry side assailed the youthful dame
          Herself surrendered unto Cupid's flame.
          Should I give way, said she, who'll tell the tale?
          No risk is run if secrecy prevail.
          The marquis merits to be played the trick;
          He no excuse can have, unless he's sick.
          One sin against another I may weigh,
          And man for man will equally repay.

          SO inexperienced Reynold was not found,
          But that he saw how things were going round,
          And, that Saint Julian's Prayer would yet succeed,
          To give him all the lodging he might need.

          THE supper o'er, our couple left alone,
          What fairer field could truly have been shown?
          The belle now wore a smart becoming dress,
          Designed, in ev'ry view, to prepossess.
          'Twas NEGLIGENCE, so requisite to please
          And fascinate, with airy, careless ease,
          According to the taste which I pursue,
          That made her charms so exquisite to view.
          No gaudy tinsel: all was flowing light;
          Though not superb, yet pleasing to the sight;
          A neckerchief, where much should be concealed,
          Was made so narrow,--beauties half revealed;
          Beneath is shade--what words can ne'er express;
          And Reynold saw enough the rest to guess.
          No more I say; the belle indeed was fair,
          Possessed of youth and all engaging air;
          Tall, nicely formed; each grace, that hearts could win;
          Not much of fat, nor yet appeared too thin.
          Emotion, at the view, who would not feel?
          To soft delight what bosom proves of steel?
          No marble bust, philosopher, nor stone,
          But similar sensation would have shown.

          THE silence first was broken by the dame;
          Who spoke so freely, Reynold bolder came.
          He knew not well, howe'er, discourse to find;
          To help him out the widow was inclined;
          Said she, you much remind me of a friend,
          Whose ev'ry wish I sought with mine to blend
          My husband (rest his soul!) had just those eyes,
          That look, air, mouth:--the very height and size:
          You greatly honour me, the spark replied:
          Your charms howe'er might well have been his pride;
          I ne'er beheld such soft engaging mien:
          On earth, like beauty never yet was seen.
          But, in extremes to be, appears my lot;
          Just now I felt quite chilled:--at present hot;
          Pray tell me which is best?   The fair looked down,
          And humbly seemed to wave the proffered crown,
          That she might still more flattery receive
          Address not small, if we'll our eyes believe.
          The swain now praised each charm within his view,
          And whatsoe'er his wishes could pursue;
          Where hope was strong, and expectation high,
          She would not long be cruel and deny.
          To give the praise, your due, the lover cried,
          And note the beauties that my heart divide,
          'Twould take an age, and I've a single night,
          Which surely might be passed with more delight.
          The widow smiled; enough it seems was said;
          And Reynold shortened--what to nothing led.
          In war or love, time equally is dear;
          More happy than our spark none could appear;
          No point but what he gained; the smiling dame
          Resistance only showed to raise the flame;
          Nor more nor less; each belle like art has got,
          And practises at will, or maid or not.

          BUT truly, it was never my intent
          To count each favour she to Reynold lent;
          Particulars exact of ev'ry kiss,
          And all the preludes incident to bliss;
          Both, doubtless, knew more ways than one to please;
          And sought, with anxious care, love's charms to seize.
          On recollection of the wretched state
          In which our traveller had moved of late,
          Some favour was bestowed:--there, cried the dame,
          Is something to repay the road you came;
          This for the cold; that fear; there thieves disgraced;
          So, one by one, the whole was soon effaced.
          In this way to be paid for ills we meet,
          Who'd not be satisfied with boons so sweet?
          And we conclude, that Reynold on the spot,
          Love's am'rous recompense of pleasures got.
          Now easy conversation was renewed;
          Then mutual kisses; ev'ry sweet pursued.
          'Twas time for bed; howe'er, the widow fair
          Determined that her own the spark should share;
          'Twas prudent, doubtless; like a lady wise;
          Gallantly done: one room would well suffice.

          WHAT further passed betwixt the pair that night;
          I cannot say, though we'll believe 'twas right;
          Between the clothes when laid, and unrestrained,
          Most clearly, Reynold all his wishes gained.
          There he was recompensed for ev'ry grief;
          The lady too, received so much relief,
          That she desired his company again,
          But still these visits secrets should remain;
          'Twas requisite the governor to see;
          Howe'er the dame delighted seemed to be,
          And not content with what she had bestowed,
          A purse well stored with gold to Reynold showed:
          He took no more, indeed, than what would pay
          The bare expenses on his homeward way;
          Then sought the street that to the tavern led,
          Where still his lazy servant was in bed;
          The fellow mauled; then changed throughout his dress;
          Since to the cloak-bag now he had access.
          His fortune to complete, that day they took
          The very wretches that he wished to hook.
          He to the judge repaired with ev'ry haste;
          In such a case you never time should waste;
          For, once the things are into court received,
          'Tis like the lion's den: naught e'er 's retrieved;
          Their hands are closed, not 'gainst what may be brought
          But to secure what from their grasp is sought.
          Who seeks redress by law, facts oft have shown,
          May bless his stars if he but keep his own.

          THE trial o'er, a gallows treble-faced,
          Was, for their swinging, in the market placed,
          ONE of the three harangued the mob around,
          (His speech was for the others also found)
          Then, 'bout their necks the halters being tied,
          Repentant and confessed the culprits died.

          WHO, after this, will doubt the pow'r of prayers?
          These silly knaves had banished all their cares;
          And when at ease they thought to skip and prance,
          Were seized and quickly taught another dance.
          On t'other hand, where dire distress prevailed,
          And death, in various ways, our spark assailed,
          A beauty suddenly his senses charmed,
          Who might a prelate's bosom have alarmed.
          So truly fortunate, indeed, his lot,
          Again his money, baggage, horse he got;
          And, thank Saint Julian, howsoever tossed,
          He passed a, blissful night that nothing cost.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 13 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


