The Project Gutenberg eBook of Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 16
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 16

Author: Jean de La Fontaine


        
Release date: March 1, 2004 [eBook #5290]
                Most recently updated: December 28, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/5290

Credits: This eBook was produced by David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 16 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





                     THE TALES AND NOVELS
                              OF
                      J. DE LA FONTAINE



          Volume 16.

          Contains:
             The Amorous Courtesan
             Nicaise



                    THE AMOROUS COURTESAN


          DAN CUPID, though the god of soft amour,
          In ev'ry age works miracles a store;
          Can Catos change to male coquets at ease;
          And fools make oracles whene'er he please;
          Turn wolves to sheep, and ev'ry thing so well,
          That naught remains the former shape to tell:
          Remember, Hercules, with wond'rous pow'r,
          And Polyphemus, who would men devour:
          The one upon a rock himself would fling,
          And to the winds his am'rous ditties sing;
          To cut his beard a nymph could him inspire;
          And, in the water, he'd his face admire.
          His club the other to a spindle changed,
          To please the belle with whom he often ranged.

          A hundred instances the fact attest,
          But sage Boccace has one, it is confessed,
          Which seems to me, howe'er we search around,
          To be a sample, rarely to be found.
          'Tis Chimon that I mean, a savage youth,
          Well formed in person, but the rest uncouth,
          A bear in mind, but Cupid much can do,
          LOVE licked the cub, and decent soon he grew.
          A fine gallant at length the lad appeared;
          From whence the change?--Fine eyes his bosom cheered
          The piercing rays no sooner reached his sight,
          But all the savage took at once to flight;
          He felt the tender flame; polite became;
          You'll find howe'er, our tale is not the same.

          I MEAN to state how once an easy fair,
          Who oft amused the youth devoid of care,
          A tender flame within her heart retained,
          Though haughty, singular, and unrestrained.
          Not easy 'twas her favours to procure;
          Rome was the place where dwelled this belle impure;
          The mitre and the cross with her were naught;
          Though at her feet, she'd give them not a thought;
          And those who were not of the highest class,
          No moments were allowed with her to pass.
          A member of the conclave, first in rank,
          To be her slave, she'd scarcely deign to thank;
          Unless a cardinal's gay nephew came,
          And then, perhaps, she'd listen to his flame;
          The pope himself, had he perceived her charms,
          Would not have been too good to grace her arms.
          Her pride appeared in clothes as well as air,
          And on her sparkled gold and jewels rare;
          In all the elegance of dress arrayed,
          Embroidery and lace, her taste displayed.

          THE god of soft amour beheld her aim;
          And sought at once her haughty soul to tame;
          A Roman gentleman, of finest form,
          Soon in her bosom raised a furious storm;
          Camillus was the name this youth had got;
          The nymph's was Constance, that LOVE'S arrow shot:
          Though he was mild, good humoured, and serene,
          No sooner Constance had his person seen,
          And in her breast received the urchin's dart,
          Than throbs, and trembling fears o'erwhelmed her heart.
          The flame she durst declare no other way,
          Than by those sighs, which feelings oft betray.
          Till then, nor shame nor aught could her retain;
          Now all was changed:--her bashfulness was plain.
          As none, howe'er, could think the subtle flame
          Would lie concealed with such a haughty dame,
          Camillus nothing of the kind supposed.
          Though she incessantly by looks disclosed,
          That something unrevealed disturbed the soul,
          And o'er her mind had absolute control.
          Whatever presents Constance might receive,
          Still pensive sighs her breast appeared to heave:
          Her tints of beauty too, began to fail,
          And o'er the rose, the lily to prevail.

          ONE night Camillus had a party met,
          Of youthful beaux and belles, a charming set,
          And, 'mong the rest, fair Constance was a guest;
          The evening passed in jollity and jest;
          For few to holy converse seemed inclined,
          And none for Methodists appeared designed:
          Not one, but Constance, deaf to wit was found,
          And, on her, raillery went briskly round.

          THE supper o'er the company withdrew,
          But Constance suddenly was lost to view;
          Beside a certain bed she took her seat,
          Where no one ever dreamed she would retreat,
          And all supposed, that ill, or spirits weak,
          She home had run, or something wished to seek.

          THE company retired, Camillus said,
          He meant to write before he went to bed,
          And told his valet he might go to rest
          A lucky circumstance, it is confessed.
          Thus left alone, and as the belle desired;
          Who, from her soul, the spark so much admired;
          Yet knew not how the subject to disclose,
          Or, in what way her wishes to propose;
          At length, with trembling accents, she revealed;
          The flame she longer could not keep concealed.

          EXCEEDINGLY surprised Camillus seemed,
          And scarcely could believe but what he dreamed;
          Why, hey! said he, good lady, is it thus,
          With favoured friends, you doubtful points discuss?
          He made her sit, and then his seat regained
          Who would have thought, cried he, you here remained;
          Now who this hiding place to you could tell?
          'Twas LOVE, fond LOVE! replied the beauteous belle;
          And straight a blush her lovely cheek suffused,
          So rare with those to Cyprian revels used;
          For Venus's vot'ries, to pranks resigned,
          Another way, to get a colour, find.

          CAMILLUS, truly, some suspicions had,
          That he was loved, though neither fool nor mad;
          Nor such a novice in the Paphian scene,
          But what he could at once some notions glean:
          More certain tokens, howsoe'er, to get,
          And set the lady's feelings on the fret,
          By trying if the gloom that o'er her reigned
          Was only sly pretence, he coldness feigned.

          SHE often sighed as if her heart would break;
          At length love's piercing anguish made her speak:
          What you will say, cried she, I cannot guess,
          To see me thus a fervent flame confess.
          The very thought my face with crimson dyes;
          My way of life no shield for this supplies;
          The moment pure affection 's in the soul,
          No longer wanton freaks the mind control.

          MY conduct to excuse, what can I say?
          O could my former life be done away,
          And in your recollection naught remain,
          But what might virtuous constancy maintain
          At all event, my frankness overlook,
          Too well I see, the fatal path I took
          Has such displeasure to your breast conveyed,
          My zeal will rather hurt than give me aid;
          But hurt or not, I'll idolize you still:
          Beat, drive away, contemn me as you will;
          Or worse, if you the torment can contrive
          I'm your's alone, Camillus, while alive.

          TO this harangue the wary youth replied
          In truth, fair lady, I could ne'er decide,
          To criticise what others round may do.-
          'Tis not the line I'd willingly pursue;
          And I will freely say, that your discourse
          Has much surprised me, though 'tis void of force.
          To you it surely never can belong,
          To say variety in love is wrong;
          Besides, your sex, and decency, 'tis clear,
          To ev'ry disadvantage you appear.
          What use this eloquence, and what your aim?
          Such charms alone as your's could me inflame;
          Their pow'r is great, but fully I declare,
          I do not like advances from the FAIR.

          To Constance this a thunder-clap appeared;
          Howe'er, she in her purpose persevered.
          Said she, this treatment doubtless I deserve;
          But still, from truth my tongue can never swerve,
          And if I may presume my thoughts to speak,
          The plan which I've pursued your love to seek,
          Had never proved injurious to my cause,
          If still my beauty merited applause.
          From what you've said, and what your looks express
          To please your sight, no charms I now possess.
          Whence comes this change?--to you i will refer;
          Till now I was admired, you must aver;
          And ev'ry one my person highly praised;
          These precious gifts, that admiration raised,
          Alas! are fled, and since I felt LOVE'S flame,
          Experience whispers, I'm no more the same;
          No longer have charms that please your eyes:
          How happy I should feel if they'd suffice!

          THE suppliant belle now hoped to be allowed
          One half his bed to whom her sighs were vowed;
          But terror closed her lips; she nothing said,
          Though oft her eyes were to his pillow led.
          To be confused the wily stripling feigned,
          And like a statue for a time remained.

          AT length he said:--I know not what to do;
          Undressing, by myself, I can't pursue.
          Shall I your valet call? rejoined the fair;
          On no account, said he, with looks of care;
          I would not have you in my chamber seen,
          Nor thought that here, by night, a girl had been,
          Your caution is enough, the belle replied:
          Myself between the wall and bed I'll hide,
          'Twill what you fear prevent, and ills avoid;
          But bolt the door: you'll then be not annoyed;
          Let no one come; for once I'll do my best,
          And as your valet act till you're undressed;
          To am'rous Constance this permission grant
          The honour would her throbbing breast enchant.

          THE youth to her proposal gave consent,
          And Constance instantly to business went;
          The means she used to take his clothes were such,
          That scarcely once his person felt her touch;
          She stopt not there, but even freely chose
          To take from off his feet, both shoes and hose
          What, say you:--With her hands did Constance this?
          Pray tell me what you see therein amiss?
          I wish sincerely I could do the same,
          With one for whom I feel a tender flame.

          BETWEEN the clothes in haste Camillus flew,
          Without inviting Constance to pursue.
          She thought at first he meant to try her love;
          But raillery, this conduct was above.
          His aim, howe'er more fully to unfold,
          She presently observed:--'Tis very cold;
          Where shall I sleep? said she:

                        CAMILLUS

          Just where you please;

                        CONSTANCE

          What, on this chair?

                        CAMILLUS

          No, no, be more at ease;
          Come into bed.

                        CONSTANCE

          Unlace me then, I pray.

                        CAMILLUS

          I cannot: I'm undressed, and cold as clay:
          Unlace yourself.--

          Just then the belle perceived
          A poinard, which anxiety relieved;
          She drew it from the scabbard, cut her lace,
          And many parts of dress designed for grace,
          The works of months, embroidery and flow'r
          Now perished in the sixtieth of an hour,
          Without regret, or seeming to lament,
          What more than life will of the sex content.

          YE dames of Britain, Germany, or France,
          Would you have done as much, through complaisance?
          You would not, I'm convinced: the thing is clear;
          But doubtless this, at Rome, must fine appear.

          POOR Constance softly to the bed approached,
          No longer now supposing she encroached,
          And trusting that, no stratagem again
          Would be contrived to give her bosom pain.
          Camillus said: my sentiments I'll speak;
          Dissimulation I will never seek;
          She who can proffer what should be denied,
          Shall never be admitted by my side;
          But if the place your approbation meet,
          I won't refuse your lying at my feet.

          FAIR Constance such reproof could not withstand,
          'Twas well the poinard was not in her hand;
          Her bosom so severely felt the smart,
          She would have plunged the dagger through her heart:
          But Hope, sweet Hope! still fluttered to her view;
          And young Camillus pretty well she knew;
          Howe'er with such severity he spoke,
          That e'en the mildest saint it would provoke;
          Yet, in a swain so easy, gentle, kind,
          'Twas strange so little lenity to find.

          SHE placed herself, as order'd, cross the bed,
          And at his feet at length reclined her head;
          A kiss on them she ventured to impress,
          But not too roughly, lest she should transgress:
          We may conjecture if he were at ease;
          What victory! to see her stoop to please;
          A beauty so renowned for charms and pride,
          'Twould take a week, to note each trait described;
          No other fault than paleness he could trace,
          Which gave her (causes known) still higher grace.

          CAMILLUS stretched his legs, and on her breast
          Familiarly allowed his feet to rest;
          A cushion made of what so fair appeared,
          That envy might from ivory be feared;
          Then seemed as if to Morpheus he inclined,
          And on the pillow sullenly resigned.
          At last the sighs with which her bosom heaved,
          Gave vent to floods of tears that much relieved;
          This was the end:--Camillus silence broke,
          And to tell the belle with pleasing accents spoke
          I'm satisfied, said he, your love is pure;
          Come hither charming girl and be secure.
          She t'wards him moved; Camillus near her slid;
          Could you, cried he, believe that what I did,
          Was seriously the dictates of my soul,
          To act the brute and ev'ry way control?
          No, no, sweet fair, you know me not 'tis plain:
          I truly wish your fondest love to gain;
          Your heart I've probed, 'tis all that I desire;
          Mid joys I swim; my bosom feels the fire.
          Your rigour now in turn you may display;
          It is but fair: be bountiful I pray;
          Myself from hence your lover I declare;
          No woman merits more my bed to share,
          Whatever rank, or beauty, sense or life,
          You equally deserve to be my wife;
          Your husband I'll become; forget the past;
          Unpleasant recollections should not last.
          Yet there's one thing which much I wish to speak
          The marriage must be secret that we seek;
          There's no occasion reasons to disclose;
          What I have said I trust will you dispose,
          To act as I desire: you'll find it best:--
          A wedding 's like amours while unconfessed;
          One THEN both husband and gallant appears,
          And ev'ry wily act the bosom cheers.
          Till we, continued he, a priest can find,
          Are you, to trust my promises inclined?
          You safely may; he'll to his word adhere:
          His heart is honest, and his tongue sincere.

          TO this fair Constance answered not a word,
          Which showed, with him, her sentiments concurred.
          The spark, no novice in the dumb assent,
          Received her silence fully as 'twas meant;
          The rest involved in myst'ry deep remains;
          Thus Constance was requitted for her pains.

          YE Cyprian nymphs to profit turn my tale;
          The god of LOVE, within his vot'ries pale,
          Has many, if their sentiments were known,
          That I'd prefer for Hymen's joys alone.
          My wife, not always to the spindle true,
          Will many things in life, not seem to view;
          By Constance and her conduct you may see
          How, with this theory, her acts agree;
          She proved the truth of what I here advance,
          And reaped the fruits produced by complaisance,
          A horde of nuns I know who, ev'ry night,
          Would such adventures wage with fond delight.

          PERHAPS it will not be with ease believed,
          That Constance from Camillus now received,
          A proof of LOVE'S enchanting balmy sweet,
          A proof perhaps you'll think her used to meet;
          But ne'er till then she tasted pleasures pure;
          Her former life no blisses could secure.
          You ask the cause, and signs of doubt betray:
          Who TRULY loves, the same will ever say.






                          NICAISE


          TO serve the shop as 'prentice was the lot;
          Of one who had the name of Nicaise got;
          A lad quite ignorant beyond his trade,
          And what arithmetick might lend him aid;
          A perfect novice in the wily art,
          That in amours is used to win the heart.
          Good tradesmen formerly were late to learn
          The tricks that soon in friars we discern;
          They ne'er were known those lessons to begin,
          Till more than down appeared upon the chin.
          But now-a-days, in practice, 'tis confessed,
          These shopkeepers are knowing as the best.

          OUR lad of ancient date was less advanced;
          At scenes of love his eyes had never glanced;
          Be that as 'twill, he now was in the way,
          And naught but want of wit produced delay:
          A belle indeed had on him set her heart
          His master's daughter felt LOVE'S poignant smart;
          A girl of most engaging mind and mien,
          And always steady in her conduct seen.
          Sincerity of soul or humour free,
          Or whether with her taste it might agree,
          A fool 'twas clear presided o'er her soul,
          And all her thoughts and actions felt control.
          Some bold gallant would p'erhaps inform her plain,
          She ever kept wild Folly in her train,
          And nothing say to me who tales relate;
          But oft on reason such proceedings wait.
          If you a goddess love, advance she'll make;
          Our belle the same advantages would take.
          Her fortune, wit, and charm, attention drew,
          And many sparks would anxiously pursue;
          How happy he who should her heart obtain,
          And Hymen prove he had not sighed in vain!
          But she had promised, to the modest youth,
          Who first was named, her confidence and truth;
          The little god of pleasing soft desire
          With full compliance with his whims require.

          THe belle was pleased the 'prentice to prefer:
          A handsome lad with truth we may aver,
          Quite young, well made, with fascinating eye:
          Such charms are ne'er despised we may rely,
          But treasures thought, no FAIR will e'er neglect;
          Whate'er her senses say, she'll these respect.
          For one that LOVE lays hold of by the soul,
          A thousand by the eyes receive control.

          THIS sprightly girl with soft endearing ease,
          Exerted ev'ry care the lad to please,
          To his regards she never shy appeared;
          Now pinched his arm, then smiled and often leered;
          Her hand across his eyes would sometimes put;
          At others try to step upon his foot.
          To this he nothing offered in reply,
          Though oft his throbbing bosom heaved a sigh.

          So many tender scenes, at length we find,
          Produced the explanation LOVE designed;
          The youthful couple, we may well believe,
          Would from each other mutual vows receive;
          They neither promises nor kisses spared,
          Incalculable were the numbers shared;
          If he had tried to keep exact account,
          He soon had been bewildered with th' amount;
          To such infinity it clearly ran,
          Mistakes would rise if he pursued the plan;
          A ceremony solely was required,
          Which prudent girls have always much admired,
          Yet this to wait gave pain and made her grieve;
          From you, said she, the boon I would receive;
          Or while I live the rapture never know,
          That Hymen at his altar can bestow;
          To you I promise, by the pow'rs divine,
          My hand and heart I truly will resign.
          Howe'er I'll freely say, should Hymen fail
          To make me your's and wishes not prevail,
          You must not fancy I'll become a nun,
          Though much I hope to act as I've begun;
          To marry you would please me to the soul;
          But how can WE the ruling pow'rs control?
          Too much I'm confident you love my fame,
          To aim at what might bring me soon to shame:
          In wedlock I've been asked by that and this;
          My father thinks these offers not amiss;
          But, Nicaise, I'll allow you still to hope,
          That if with others I'm obliged to cope,
          No matter whether counsellor or judge.
          Since clearly ev'ry thing to such I grudge,
          The marriage eve, or morn, or day, or hour,
          To you I'll give--the first enchanting flow'r.

          THE lad most gratefully his thanks returned;
          His breast with ev'ry soft emotion burned.
          Within a week, to this sweet charmer came,
          A rich young squire, who soon declared his flame;
          On which she said to Nicaise:--he will do;
          This spark will easily let matters through;
          And as the belle was confident of that,
          She gave consent and listened to his chat.
          Soon all was settled and arranged the day,
          When marriage they no longer would delay,
          You'll fully notice this:--I think I view
          The thoughts which move around and you pursue;
          'Twas doubtless clear, whatever bliss in store,
          The lady was betrothed, and nothing more.

          THOUGH all was fixed a week before the day,
          Yet fearing accidents might things delay,
          Or even break the treaty ere complete,
          She would not our apprentice fully greet,
          Till on the very morn she gave her hand,
          Lest chance defeated what was nicely planned.

          HOWE'ER the belle was to the altar led,
          A virgin still, and doomed the squire to wed,
          Who, quite impatient, consummation sought,
          As soon as he the charmer back had brought;
          But she solicited the day apart,
          And this obtained, alone by prayers and art.
          'Twas early morn, and 'stead of bed she dressed,
          In ev'ry thing a queen had thought the best;
          With diamonds, pearls, and various jewels rare;
          Her husband riches had, she was aware,
          Which raised her into rank that dress required,
          And all her neighbours envied and admired.
          Her lover, to secure the promised bliss,
          An hour's indulgence gained to take a kiss.
          A bow'r within a garden was the spot,
          Which, for their private meeting, they had got.
          A confidant had been employed around,
          To watch if any one were lurking found.

          THE lady was the first who thither came;
          To get a nosegay was, she said, her aim;
          And Nicaise presently her steps pursued,
          Who, when the turf within the bow'r he viewed,
          Exclaimed, oh la! how wet it is my dear!
          Your handsome clothes will be spoiled I fear!
          A carpet let me instantly provide?
          Deuce take the clothes! the fair with anger cried;
          Ne'er think of that: I'll say I had a fall;
          Such accident a loss I would not call,
          When Time so clearly on the wing appears,
          'Tis right to banish scruples, cares, and fears;
          Nor think of clothes nor dress, however fine,
          But those to dirt or flames at once resign;
          Far better this than precious time to waste,
          Since frequently in minutes bliss we taste;
          A quarter of an hour we now should prize,
          The place no doubt will very well suffice;
          With you it rests such moments to employ,
          And mutually our bosoms fill with joy.
          I scarcely ought to say what now I speak,
          But anxiously your happiness I seek.

          INDEED, the anxious, tender youth replied,
          To save such costly clothes we should decide;
          I'll run at once, and presently be here;
          Two minutes will suffice I'm very clear.
          AWAY the silly lad with ardour flew,
          And left no time objections to renew.
          His wondrous folly cured the charming dame;
          Whose soul so much disdained her recent flame;
          That instantly her heart resumed its place,
          Which had too long been loaded with disgrace:
          Go, prince of fools, she to herself exclaimed,
          For ever, of thy conduct, be ashamed;
          To lose thee surely I can ne'er regret,
          Impossible a worse I could have met.
          I've now considered, and 'tis very plain,
          Thou merit'st not such favours to obtain;
          From hence I swear, by ev'ry thing above;
          My husband shall alone possess my love;
          And least I might be tempted to betray,
          To him I'll instantly the boon convey,
          Which Nicaise might have easily received;
          Thank Heav'n my breast from folly is relieved.
          This said, by disappointment rendered sour,
          The beauteous bride in anger left the bow'r.
          Soon with the carpet simple Nicaise came,
          And found that things no longer were the same.

          THE lucky hour, ye suitors learn I pray,
          Is not each time the clock strikes through the day,
          In Cupid's alphabet I think I've read,
          Old Time, by lovers, likes not to be led;
          And since so closely he pursues his plan,
          'Tis right to seize him, often as you can.
          Delays are dangerous, in love or war,
          And Nicaise is a proof they fortune mar.

          QUITE out of breath with having quickly run;
          Delighted too that he so soon had done,
          The youth returned most anxious to employ,
          The carpet for his mistress to enjoy,
          But she alas! with rage upon her brow,
          Had left the spot, he knew not why nor how;
          And to her company returned in haste
          The flame extinguished that her mind disgraced.
          Perhaps she went the jewel to bestow,
          Upon her spouse, whose breast with joy would glow:
          What jewel pray?--The one that ev'ry maid
          Pretends to have, whatever tricks she's played.
          This I believe; but I'll no dangers run;
          To burn my fingers I've not yet begun;
          Yet I allow, howe'er, in such a case,
          The girl, who fibs, therein no sin can trace.

          OUR belle who, thanks to Nicaise, yet retained;
          In spite of self, the flow'r he might have gained,
          Was grumbling still, when he the lady met
          Why, how is this, cried he, did you forget,
          That for this carpet I had gone away?
          When spread, how nicely on it we might play!
          You'd soon to woman change the silly maid;
          Come, let's return, and not the bliss evade;
          No fear of dirt nor spoiling of your dress;
          And then my love I fully will express.

          NOT so, replied the disappointed dame,
          We'll put it off:--perhaps 'twould hurt your frame
          Your health I value, and I would advise,
          To be at ease, take breath, and prudence prize;
          Apprentice in a shop you now are bound
          Next 'prentice go to some gallant around;
          You'll not so soon his pleasing art require,
          Nor to your tutorage can I now aspire.
          Friend Nicaise take some neighb'ring servant maid,
          You're quite a master in the shopping trade;
          Stuffs you can sell, and ask the highest price;
          And to advantage turn things in a trice.
          But opportunity you can't discern;
          To know its value,--prithee go and learn.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Delays are dangerous, in love or war
Opportunity you can't discern--prithee go and learn







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 16 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


