The Project Gutenberg eBook of Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 18
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 18

Author: Jean de La Fontaine


        
Release date: March 1, 2004 [eBook #5292]
                Most recently updated: December 28, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/5292

Credits: This eBook was produced by David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 18 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





                     THE TALES AND NOVELS
                              OF
                      J. DE LA FONTAINE



          Volume 18.

          Contains:
             The Case of Conscience
             The Devil of Pope-fig Island
             Feronde



                   THE CASE OF CONSCIENCE


          THOSE who in fables deal, bestow at ease
          Both names and titles, freely as they please.
          It costs them scarcely any thing, we find.
          And each is nymph or shepherdess designed;
          Some e'en are goddesses, that move below,
          From whom celestial bliss of course must flow.

          THIS Horace followed, with superior art:--
          If, to the trav'ller's bed, with throbbing heart,
          The chambermaid approached, 'twas Ilia found,
          Or fair Egeria, or some nymph renowned.

          GOD, in his goodness, made, one lovely day,
          Apollo, who directs the lyrick lay,
          And gave him pow'rs to call and name at will,
          Like father Adam, with primordial skill.
          Said he, go, names bestow that please the ear;
          In ev'ry word let sweetest sound appear.
          This ancient law then proves, by right divine,
          WE oft are sponsors to the royal line.

          WHEN pleasing tales and fables I endite,
          I, who in humble verse presume to write,
          May surely use this privilege of old,
          And, to my fancy, appellations mould.
          If I, instead of Anne, should Sylvia say,
          And Master Thomas (when the case I weigh)
          Should change to Adamas, the druid sage,
          Must I a fine or punishment engage?
          No, surely not:--at present I shall choose
          Anne and the Parson for my tale to use.

          WITHIN her village, Anne was thought the belle,
          And ev'ry other charmer to excel.
          As near a river once she chanced to stray,
          She saw a youth in Nature's pure array,
          Who bathed at ease within the gliding stream;
          The girl was brisk, and worthy of esteem,
          Her eyes were pleased; the object gave delight;
          Not one defect could be produced in sight;
          Already, by the shepherdess adored,
          If with the belle to pleasing flights he'd soared,
          The god of love had all they wished concealed
          None better know what should not be revealed.
          Anne nothing feared: the willows were her shade,
          Which, like Venetian blinds, a cov'ring made;
          Her eyes, howe'er, across had easy view,
          And, o'er the youth, each beauty could pursue.

          SHE back four paces drew, at first, through shame;
          Then, led by LOVE, eight others forward came;
          But scruples still arose that ardour foiled,
          And nearly ey'ry thing had truly spoiled.
          Anne had a conscience pure as holy fire;
          But how could she abstain from soft desire?
          If, in the bosom chance a flame should raise,
          Is there a pow'r can then subdue the blaze?
          At first these inclinations she withstood;
          But doubting soon, how those of flesh and blood
          Could sins commit by stepping in advance,
          She took her seat upon the green expanse,
          And there attentively the lad observed,
          With eyes that scarcely from him ever swerved.

          PERHAPS you've seen, from Nature, drawings made?
          Some Eve, or Adam, artists then persuade,
          In birth-attire to stand within their view,
          While they with care and taste each trait pursue;
          And, like our shepherdess, their stations take,
          A perfect semblance ev'ry way to make.

          ANNE in her mem'ry now his image placed;
          Each line and feature thoroughly she traced,
          And even now the fair would there remain,
          If William (so was called this youthful swain)
          Had not the water left; when she retired,
          Though scarcely twenty steps from him admired,
          Who, more alert than usual then appeared,
          And, by the belle, in silence was revered.

          WHEN such sensations once were in the breast,
          Love there we may believe would hardly rest.

          THE favours Anne reserved he thought his own,
          Though expectations oft away have flown.
          The more of this I think, the less I know;
          Perhaps one half our bliss to chance we owe!

          BE this as 'twill, the conscientious Anne
          Would nothing venture to regale her man;
          Howe'er, she stated what had raised her fear,
          And ev'ry thing that made her persevere.

          WHEN Easter came, new difficulties rose
          Then, in confession, ALL she should disclose.
          Anne, passing peccadillos in review,
          This case aside, as an intruder threw;
          But parson Thomas made her all relate;
          And ev'ry circumstance most clearly state;
          That he, by knowing fully each defect,
          Might punishment accordingly direct,
          In which no father-confessor should err,
          Who absolution justly would confer.
          The parson much his penitent abused;
          Said he, with sensual views to be amused,
          Is such a sin, 'tis scarcely worse to steal;
          The sight is just the same as if you feel.

          HOWE'ER, the punishment that he imposed
          Was nothing great:--too slight to be disclosed;
          Enough to say, that in the country round,
          The father-confessors, who there abound,
          As in our own, (perhaps in ev'ry part,)
          Have devotees, who, when they ought to smart,
          A tribute pay, according to their lot,
          And thus indulgences are often got.

          THIS tribute to discharge the current year,
          Much troubled Anne, and filled her breast with fear,
          When William, fishing, chanced a pike to hook,
          And gave it to his dear at once to cook,
          Who, quite delighted, hastened to the priest,
          And begged his rev'rence on the fish to feast.
          The parson with the present much was pleased;
          A tap upon the shoulder care appeased;
          And with a smile he to the bringer said
          This fish, with trifles on the table spread,
          Will all complete; 'twas holyday we find,
          When other clergy with our rector dined.
          Will you still more oblige, the parson cried,
          And let the fish at home by you be fried?
          Then bring it here:--my servant's very new,
          And can't attempt to cook as well as you.
          Anne hastened back; meanwhile the priests arrived,
          Much noise, and rout of course, once these were hived;
          Wines from the vault were brought without delay;
          Each of the quality would something say.

          THE dinner served; the dean at table placed;
          Their conversation various points embraced;
          To state the whole would clearly endless be;
          In this no doubt the reader will agree.
          They changed and changed, and healths went round and round;
          No time for scandal while such cheer was found;
          The first and second course away were cleared,
          Dessert served up, yet still no pike appeared.
          The dinner o'er without th' expected dish,
          Or even a shadow of the promised fish.
          When William learned the present Anne had made,
          His wish, to have it cancelled, with her weighed.
          The rector was surprised, you may suppose,
          And, soon as from the table all arose,
          He went to Anne, and called her fool and knave,
          And, in his wrath, could scarcely secrets wave,
          But nearly her reproached the bathing scene;
          What, treat, said he, your priest like base and mean?

          ANNE archly answered, with expression neat:--
          The sight is just the same as if you eat!






                  THE DEVIL OF POPE-FIG ISLAND


          BY master Francis clearly 'tis expressed:
          The folks of Papimania are blessed;
          True sleep for them alone it seems was made
          With US the copy only has been laid;
          And by Saint John, if Heav'n my life will spare,
          I'll see this place where sleeping 's free from care.
          E'en better still I find, for naught they do:
          'Tis that employment always I pursue.
          Just add thereto a little honest love,
          And I shall be as easy as a glove.

          ON t'other hand an island may be seen,
          Where all are hated, cursed, and full of spleen.
          We know them by the thinness of their face
          Long sleep is quite excluded from their race.

          SHOULD you, good reader, any person meet,
          With rosy, smiling looks, and cheeks replete,
          The form not clumsy, you may safely say,
          A Papimanian doubtless I survey.
          But if, on t'other side, you chance to view,
          A meagre figure, void of blooming hue,
          With stupid, heavy eye, and gloomy mien
          Conclude at once a Pope-figer, you've seen.

          POPE-FIG 'S the name upon an isle bestowed,
          Where once a fig the silly people showed,
          As like the pope, and due devotion paid:--
          By folly, blocks have often gods been made!
          These islanders were punished for their crime;
          Naught prospers, Francis tells us, in their clime;
          To Lucifer was giv'n the hateful spot,
          And there his country house he now has got.
          His underlings appear throughout the isle,
          Rude, wretched, poor, mean, sordid, base, and vile;
          With tales, and horns, and claws, if we believe,
          What many say who ought not to deceive.

          ONE day it happened that a cunning clown
          Was by an imp observed, without the town,
          To turn the earth, which seemed to be accurst,
          Since ev'ry trench was painful as the first.
          This youthful devil was a titled lord;
          In manners simple:--naught to be abhorred;
          He might, so ignorant, be duped at ease;
          As yet he'd scarcely ventured to displease:
          Said he, I'd have thee know, I was not born,
          Like clods to labour, dig nor sow the corn;
          A devil thou in me beholdest here,
          Of noble race: to toil I ne'er appear.

          THOU know'st full well, these fields to us belong:
          The islanders, it seems, had acted wrong;
          And, for their crimes, the pope withdrew his cares;
          Our subjects now you live, the law declares;
          And therefore, fellow, I've undoubted right,
          To take the produce of this field, at sight;
          But I am kind, and clearly will decide
          The year concluded, we'll the fruits divided.
          What crop, pray tell me, dost thou mean to sow?
          The clod replied, my lord, what best will grow
          I think is Tousell; grain of hardy fame;
          The imp rejoined, I never heard its name;
          What is it. Tousell, say'st thou?--I agree,
          If good return, 'twill be the same to me;
          Work fellow, work; make haste, the ground prepare;
          To dig and delve should be the rabble's care;
          Don't think that I will ever lend a hand,
          Or give the slightest aid to till the land;
          I've told thee I'm a gentleman by birth,
          Designed for ease: not doomed to turn the earth.
          Howe'er I'll now the diff'rent parts allot,
          And thus divide the produce of the plot:--
          What shall above the heritage arise,
          I'll leave to thee; 'twill very well suffice;
          But what is in the soil shall be my share;
          To this attend, see ev'ry thing is fair.

          THIS beardless corn when ripe, with joy was reaped,
          And then the stubble by the roots was heaped,
          To satisfy the lordly devil's claim,
          Who thought the seed and root were just the same,
          And that the ear and stalk were useless parts,
          Which nothing made if carried to the marts:
          The labourer his produce housed with care;
          The other to the market brought his ware,
          Where ridicule and laughter he received;
          'Twas nothing worth, which much his bosom grieved.

          QUITE mortified, the devil quickly went;
          To seek our clod, and mark his discontent:
          The fellow had discreetly sold the corn,
          In straw, unthrashed, and off the money borne,
          Which he, with ev'ry wily care, concealed;
          The imp was duped, and nothing was revealed.
          Said he, thou rascal?--pretty tricks thou'st played;
          It seems that cheating is thy daily trade;
          But I'm a noble devil of the court,
          Who tricking never knew, save by report.
          What grain dost mean to sow th' ensuing year?
          The labourer replied, I think it clear,
          Instead of grain, 'twill better be to chop,
          And take a carrot, or a turnip crop;
          You then, my lord, will surely plenty find;
          And radishes, if you are so inclined.

          THESE carrots, radishes, and turnips too,
          Said t'other, I am led to think will do;
          My part shall be what 'bove the soil is found:
          Thine, fellow, what remains within the ground;
          No war with thee I'll have, unless constrained,
          And thou hast never yet of me complained.
          I now shall go and try to tempt a nun,
          For I'm disposed to have a little fun.

          THE time arrived again to house the store;
          The labourer collected as before;
          Leaves solely to his lordship were assigned,
          Who sought for those a ready sale to find,
          But through the market ridicule was heard,
          And ev'ry one around his jest preferred:--
          Pray, Mister Devil, where d'ye grow these greens?
          How treasure up returns from your demesnes?

          ENRAGED at what was said, he hurried back,
          And, on the clown, proposed to make attack,
          Who, full of joy, was laughing with his wife,
          And tasting pleasantly the sweets of life.
          By all the pow'rs of Hell, the demon cried,
          He shall the forfeit pay, I now decide;
          A pretty rascal truly, master Phil:
          Here, pleasures you expect at will,
          Well, well, proceed; gallant it while allowed;
          For present I'll remit what I had vowed;
          A charming lady I'm engaged to meet;
          She's sometimes willing: then again discreet;
          But soon as I, in cuckold's row, have placed
          Her ninny husband, I'll return in haste,
          And then so thoroughly I'll trim you o'er,
          Such wily tricks you'll never practise more;
          We'll see who best can use his claws and nails,
          And from the fields obtain the richest sales.
          Corn, carrots, radishes, or what you will:--
          Crop as you like, and show your utmost skill
          No stratagems howe'er with culture blend;
          I'll take my portion from the better end;
          Within a week, remember, I'll be here,
          And recollect:--you've every thing to fear.

          AMAZED at what the lordly devil said,
          The clod could naught reply, so great his dread;
          But at the gasconade Perretta smiled,
          Who kept his house and weary hours beguiled,
          A sprightly clever lass, with prying eye,
          Who, when a shepherdess, could more descry,
          Than sheep or lambs she watched upon the plain,
          If other views or points she sought to gain.
          Said she, weep not, I'll undertake at ease,
          To gull this novice-devil as I please;
          He's young and ignorant; has nothing seen;
          Thee; from his rage, I thoroughly will skreen;
          My little finger, if I like can show
          More malice than his head and body know.

          THE day arrived, our labourer, not brave,
          Concealed himself, but not in vault nor cave;
          He plunged within a vase extremely large,
          Where holy-water always was in charge;
          No demon would have thought to find him there,
          So well the clod had chosen his repair;
          In sacred stoles he muffled up his skin,
          And, 'bove the water, only kept his chin;
          There we will leave him, while the priests profound
          Repeated Vade retro round and round.

          PERRETTA at the house remained to greet
          The lordly devil whom she hoped to cheat.
          He soon appeared; when with dishevelled hair,
          And flowing tears, as if o'erwhelmed with care,
          She sallied forth, and bitterly complained,
          How oft by Phil she had been scratched and caned;
          Said she, the wretch has used me very ill;
          Of cruelty he has obtained his fill;
          For God's sake try, my lord, to get away:
          Just now I heard the savage fellow say,
          He'd with his claws your lordship tear and slash:
          See, only see, my lord, he made this gash;
          On which she showed:--what you will guess, no doubt,
          And put the demon presently to rout,
          Who crossed himself and trembled with affright:
          He'd never seen nor heard of such a sight,
          Where scratch from claws or nails had so appeared;
          His fears prevailed, and off he quickly steered;
          Perretta left, who, by her friends around,
          Was complimented on her sense profound,
          That could so well the demon's snares defeat;
          The clergy too pronounced her plan discrete.






                            FERONDE


          IN Eastern climes, by means considered new;
          The Mount's old-man, with terrors would pursue;
          His large domains howe'er were not the cause,
          Nor heaps of gold, that gave him such applause,
          But manners strange his subjects to persuade;
          In ev'ry wish, to serve him they were made.
          Among his people boldest hearts he chose,
          And to their view would Paradise disclose
          Its blissful pleasures:--ev'ry soft delight,
          Designed to gratify the sense and sight.
          So plausible this prophet's tale appeared,
          Each word he dropt was thoroughly revered.
          Whence this delusion?--DRINK deranged the mind;
          And, reason drowned, to madness they resigned.
          Thus void of knowing clearly what they did,
          They soon were brought to act as they were bid;
          Conveyed to places, charming to the eye,
          Enchanting gardens 'neath an azure sky,
          With twining shrubs, meandring walks, and flow'rs,
          And num'rous grottos, porticoes and bow'rs.
          When they chanced to pass where all was gay,
          From wine's inebriating pow'rful sway,
          They wondered at the frolicking around,
          And fancied they were got on fairy ground,
          Which Mahomet pretended was assigned,
          For those to his doctrine were inclined.
          To tempt the men and girls to seek the scene,
          And skip and play and dance upon the green,
          To murm'ring streams, meandering along,
          And lutes' soft notes and nightingales' sweet song:
          No earthly pleasure but might there be viewed,
          The best of wines and choicest fruits accrued,
          To render sense bewildered at the sight,
          And sink inebriated with delight.

          THEN back they bore them motionless to sleep,
          And wake with wishes further joys to reap.
          From these enjoyments many fully thought,
          To such enchanting scenes they should be brought,
          In future times, eternal bliss to taste,
          If death and danger valiantly they faced,
          And tried the prophet Mahomet to please,
          And ev'ry point to serve their prince would seize.

          THE Mount's old man, by means like these, could say;
          He'd men devoted to support his sway;
          Upon the globe no empire more was feared,
          Or king or potentate like him revered.
          These circumstances I've minutely told,
          To show, our tale was known in days of old.

          FERONDE, a rich, but awkward, vulgar clown,
          A ninny was believed throughout the town;
          He had the charge of revenues not slight,
          Which he collected for a friar white.
          Of these I've known as good as any black,
          When husbands some assistance seemed to lack,
          And had so much to do, they monks might need;
          Or other friends, their work at home to speed.
          This friar for to-morrow never thought,
          But squandered ev'ry thing as soon as brought;
          No saint-apostle less of wealth retained;
          Good cheer o'er ev'ry wish triumphant reigned,
          Save now and then to have a little fun,
          (Unknown to others) with a pretty nun.

          FERONDE had got a spouse of pleasing sight,
          Related nearly to our friar white,
          Whose predecessor, uncle, sponsor kind,
          Now gone to realms of night, had her consigned,
          To be this silly blockhead's lawful wife,
          Who thought her hand the honour of his life.
          'Tis said that bastard-daughters oft retain
          A disposition to the parent-train;
          And this, the saying, truly ne'er bellied,
          Nor was her spouse so weak but he descried,
          Things clearer than was requisite believed,
          And doubted much if he were not deceived.

          THE wife would often to the prelate go,
          Pretending business, proper he should know;
          A thousand circumstances she could find;
          'Twas then accounts: now sev'ral things combined;
          In short no day nor hour within the week,
          But something at the friar's she would seek.
          The holy father then was always prone,
          To send the servants off and be alone.
          Howe'er the husband, doubting tricks were played;
          Got troublesome; his wife would much upbraid
          When she returned, and often beat her too;
          In short,--he unaccommodating grew.

          THE rural mind by nature jealous proves;
          Suspicion shows of ev'ry thing that moves;
          Unused to city ways, perverse appears,
          And, undismayed, to principle adheres:

          THE friar found his situation hard;
          He loved his ease?--all trouble would discard;
          As priests in gen'ral anxiously desire;
          Their plan howe'er I never can admire,
          And should not choose at once to take the town,
          But by the escalade obtain the crown;
          In LOVE I mean; to WAR I don't allude:
          No silly bragging I would here intrude,
          Nor be enrolled among the martial train:
          'Tis Venus' court that I should like to gain.
          Let t'other custom be the better way:
          It matters not; no longer I'll delay,
          But to my tale return, and fully state,
          How our receiver, who misused his mate;
          Was put in purgatory to be cured,
          And, for a time, most thoroughly immured.

          BY means of opiate powders, much renowned,
          The friar plunged him in a sleep profound.
          Thought dead; the fun'ral obsequies achieved,
          He was surprised, and doubtless sorely grieved,
          When he awoke and saw where he was placed,
          With folks around, not much to suit his taste;
          For in the coffin he at large was left,
          And of the pow'r to move was not bereft,
          But might arise and walk about the tomb,
          Which opened to another vaulted room,
          The gloomy, hollow mansion of the dead:
          Fear quickly o'er his drooping spirits spread.
          What's here? cried he: is't sleep, or is it death;
          Some charm or spell perhaps withdraws their breath.
          Our wight then asked their names and business there;
          And why he was retained in such a snare?
          In what had he offended God or man?--

          Said one, console thyself:--past moments scan;
          When thou hast rested here a thousand years,
          Thou'lt then ascend amid the Heav'nly spheres;
          But first in holy purgatory learn,
          To cleanse thyself from sins that we discern;
          One day thy soul shall leave this loathsome place,
          And, pure as ice, repair to realms of grace.
          Then this consoling Angel gave a thwack,
          And ten or dozen stripes laid on his back:--
          'Tis thy unruly, jealous mind, said he,
          Displeases God, and dooms thee here to be.

          A MOURNFUL sigh the lorn receiver heaved,
          His aching shoulders rubbed, and sobbed and grieved;
          A thousand years, cried he, 'tis long indeed!
          My very soul with horror seems to bleed.

          WE should observe, this Angel was a wag,
          A novice-friar and a convent fag;
          Like him the others round had parts to act,
          And were disguised in dresses quite exact.
          Our penitent most humbly pardon sought;
          Said he, if e'er to life again I'm brought,
          No jealousy, suspicion's hateful bane,
          Shall ever enter my distracted brain.
          May I not have this grace, this wished for boon?
          Some hopes they gave, but it could not be soon;
          In short a year he lay upon the floor:
          Just food for life received, and nothing more,
          Each day on bread and water he was fed,
          And o'er his back the cat-o'nine-tails spread:
          Full twenty lashes were the number set,
          Unless the friar should from Heav'n first get
          Permission to remit at times a part,
          For charity was glowing in his heart.

          WE, must not doubt, he often offered prayers,
          To ease the culprit's sufferings and cares.
          The Angel likewise made a long discourse;
          Said he, those vile suspicions were the source,
          Of all thy sorrow, wretchedness, and pain:
          Think'st thou such thoughts the clergy entertain?
          A friar white!--too bad in ev'ry sense:
          Ten strokes to one, if black, for such offence.
          Repent, I say:--the other this desired,
          Though scarcely he could tell what was required.

          MEANWHILE the prelate with the fav'rite dame,
          No time to lose, made ev'ry hour the same.
          The husband, with a sigh, was heard to say:
          I wonder what my wife's about to-day?
          About?--whate'er it be 'tis doubtless right;
          Our friar, to console her, takes delight;
          Thy business too is managed as before,
          And anxious care bestowed upon thy store.

          HAS she as usual matters that demand
          Attendance at the cloister to be scanned?--
          No doubt was the reply, for having now
          The whole affair upon her feeble brow,
          Poor woman! be her wishes what they will,
          She more assistance wants thy loss to fill.

          DISCOURSE like this no pleasure gave the soul:
          To call him so seems best upon the whole,
          Since he'd not pow'r like others here to feed:--
          Mere earthly shadow for a time decreed.

          A MONTH was passed in fasting, pains, and prayer;
          Some charity the friar made him share,
          And now and then remission would direct;
          The widow too he never would neglect,
          But, all the consolation in his pow'r,
          Bestowed upon her ev'ry leisure hour,
          His tender cares unfruitful were not long;
          Beyond his hopes the soil proved good and strong;
          In short our Pater Abbas justly feared,
          To make him father many signs appeared.

          SINCE 'twere improper such a fact were known;
          When proofs perhaps too clearly might be shown,
          So many prayers were said and vigils kept,
          At length the soul from purgatory crept,
          So much reduced, and ev'ry way so thin
          But little more he seemed than bones and skin.

          A THING so strange filled numbers with surprise,
          Who scarcely would believe their ears and eyes.
          The friar passed for saint:--Feronde his fruit;
          None durst presume to doubt nor to dispute;
          A double miracle at once appeared
          The dead's return: the lady's state revered.
          With treble force Te Deum round was sung;
          Sterility in marriage oft was rung,
          And near the convent many offered prayers,
          In hopes their fervent vows would gain them heirs.

          THE humble spouse and wife we now shall leave
          Let none, howe'er, suppose that we conceive,
          Each husband merits, as our soul, the same,
          To cure the jealous fears his breast inflame.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Perhaps one half our bliss to chance we owe
The more of this I think, the less I know
Though expectations oft away have flown
When husbands some assistance seemed to lack







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 18 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


