The Project Gutenberg eBook of Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 04
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 04

Author: Jean de La Fontaine


        
Release date: March 1, 2004 [eBook #5278]
                Most recently updated: December 28, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/5278

Credits: This eBook was produced by David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 04 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





                     THE TALES AND NOVELS
                              OF
                      J. DE LA FONTAINE



          Volume 4.

          Contains:
             The Old Man's Calendar
             The Avaricious Wife and Tricking Galant
             The Jealous Husband
             The Gascon Unpunished]



                    THE OLD MAN'S CALENDAR

          OFT have I seen in wedlock with surprise,
          That most forgot from which true bliss would rise
          When marriage for a daughter is designed,
          The parents solely riches seem to mind;
          All other boons are left to heav'n above,
          And sweet SIXTEEN must SIXTY learn to love!
          Yet still in other things they nicer seem,
          Their chariot-horses and their oxen-team
          Are truly matched;--in height exact are these,
          While those each shade alike must have to please;
          Without the choice 'twere wonderful to find,
          Or coach or wagon travel to their mind.
          The marriage journey full of cares appears,
          When couples match in neither souls nor years!
          An instance of the kind I'll now detail:
          The feeling bosom will such lots bewail!

          QUINZICA, (Richard), as the story goes,
          Indulged his wife at balls, and feasts, and shows,
          Expecting other duties she'd forget,
          In which howe'er he disappointment met.
          A judge in Pisa, Richard was, it seems,
          In law most learned: wily in his schemes;
          But silver beard and locks too clearly told,
          He ought to have a wife of diff'rent mould;
          Though he had taken one of noble birth,
          Quite young, most beautiful, and formed for mirth,
          Bartholomea Galandi her name;
          The lady's parents were of rank and fame;
          Our JUDGE herein had little wisdom shown,
          And sneering friends around were often known
          To say, his children ne'er could fathers lack:
          At giving counsel some have got a knack,
          Who, were they but at home to turn their eyes,
          Might find, perhaps, they're not so over-wise.

          QUINZICA, then perceiving that his pow'rs
          Fell short of what a bird like his devours,
          T'excuse himself and satisfy his dear,
          Pretended that, no day within the year,
          To Hymen, as a saint, was e'er assigned,
          In calendar, or book of any kind,
          When full ATTENTION to the god was paid:--
          To aged sires a nice convenient aid;
          But this the sex by no means fancy right;
          Few days to PLEASURE could his heart invite
          At times, the week entire he'd have a fast;
          At others, say the day 'mong saints was classed,
          Though no one ever heard its holy name;--
          FAST ev'ry Friday--Saturday the same,
          Since Sunday followed, consecrated day;
          Then Monday came:--still he'd abstain from play;
          Each morning find excuse, but solemn feasts
          Were days most sacred held by all the priests;
          On abstinence, then, Richard lectures read,
          And long before the time, was always led
          By sense of right, from dainties to refrain:
          A period afterward would also gain;
          The like observed before and after Lent;
          And ev'ry feast had got the same extent;
          These times were gracious for our aged man;
          And never pass them was his constant plan.

          OF patron saints he always had a list;
          Th' evangelists, apostles, none he miss'd;
          And that his scruples might have constant food;
          Some days malign, he said, were understood;
          Then foggy weather;--dog-days' fervent heat:
          To seek excuses he was most complete,
          And ne'er asham'd but manag'd things so well,
          Four times a year, by special grace, they tell,
          Our sage regal'd his youthful blooming wife,
          A little with the sweets of marriage life.

          WITH this exception he was truly kind,
          Fine dresses, jewels, all to please her mind;
          But these are bawbles which alone controul
          Those belles, like dolls, mere bodies void of soul.
          Bartholomea was of diff'rent clay;
          Her only pleasure (as our hist'ries say),
          To go in summer to the neighb'ring coast,
          Where her good spouse a charming house could boast,
          In which they took their lodging once a week;
          At times they pleasure on the waves would seek,
          As fishing with the lady would agree,
          And she was wond'rous partial to the sea,
          Though far to sail they always would refuse.
          One day it happened better to amuse,
          Our couple diff'rent fishing vessels took,
          And skimm'd the wave to try who most could hook,
          Of fish and pleasure; and they laid a bet,
          The greatest number which of them should get.
          On board they had a man or two at most.
          And each the best adventure hop'd to boast.

          A CERTAIN pirate soon observ'd the ship,
          In which this charming lady made the trip,
          And presently attack'd and seiz'd the same;
          But Richard's bark to shore in safety came;
          So near the land, or else he would not brave,
          To any great extent, the stormy wave,
          Or that the robber thought if both he took,
          He could not decently for favours look,
          And he preferr'd those joys the FAIR bestow,
          To all the riches which to mortals flow.

          ALTHOUGH a pirate, he had always shown
          Much honour in his acts, as well was known;
          But Cupid's frolicks were his heart's delight:
          None truly brave can ever beauty slight;
          A sailor's always bold and kind and free,
          Good lib'ral fellows, such they'll ever be;
          'Mong saints indeed 'twere vain their names to seek!
          The man was good howe'er of whom we speak;
          His usual name was Pagamin Montegue;
          For hours the lady's screams were heard a league,
          While he each minute anxiously would seize,
          To cheer her spirits and her heart to please;
          T'attain his wish he ev'ry art combined;
          At length the lovely captive all resigned.
          'Twas Cupid conquer'd, Cupid with his dart;
          A thousand times more pirate in his art,
          Than Pagamin; on bleeding hearts he preys,
          But little quarter gives, nor grace displays:
          To pay her ransom she'd enough of gold;
          For this her spouse was truly never cold;
          No fast nor festival therein appear'd,
          And her captivity he greatly fear'd.

          THIS calendar o'erspread with rubrick days;
          She soon forgot and learn'd the pirate's ways;
          The matrimonial zone aside was thrown,
          And only mentioned where the fact was known:

          OUR lawyer would his fingers sooner burn;
          Than have his wife but virtuous home return;
          By means of gold he entertain'd no doubt,
          Her restoration might be brought about.
          A passport from the pirate he obtain'd,
          Then waited on him and his wish explain'd;
          To pay he offer'd what soe'er he'd ask;
          His terms accept, though hard perhaps the task;

          THE robber answer'd, if my name around,
          Be not for honourable acts renown'd,
          'Tis quite unjust:--your partner I'll restore
          In health, without a ransom:--would you more?
          A friendship so respect'd, heav'n forefend!
          Should ever, by my conduct, have an end.
          The fair, whom you so ardently admire,
          Shall to your arms return as you desire,
          Such pleasure to a friend I would not sell;
          Convince me that she's your's, and all is well;
          For if another I to you should give,
          (And many that I've taken with me live,)
          I surely should incur a heavy blame;
          I lately captur'd one, a charming dame,
          With auburn locks, a little fat, tall, young;
          If she declare she does to you belong,
          When you she's seen, I will the belle concede;
          You'll take her instantly; I'll not impede.

          THE sage replied, your conduct's truly wise;
          Such wond'rous kindness fills me with surprise;
          But since 'tis said that every trade must live,
          The sum just mention:--I'll the ransom give;
          No compliment I wish, my purse behold
          You know the money presently is told;
          Consider me a stranger now I pray;
          With you I'd equal probity display,
          And so will act, I swear, as you shall see;
          There 's not a doubt the fair will go with me;
          My word for this I would not have you take:--
          You'll see how happy 'twill the lady make
          To find me here; to my embrace she'll fly;
          My only fears--that she of joy will die.
          To them the charmer now was instant brought,
          Who eyed her husband as beneath a thought;
          Received him coldly, just as if he'd been
          A stranger from Peru, she ne'er had seen.

          LOOK, said Quinzica, she's ashamed 'tis plain
          So many lookers on her love restrain;
          But be assured, if we were left alone,
          Around my neck her arms would soon be thrown.

          IF this, replied the pirate, you believe,
          Attend her toilet:--naught can then deceive.
          Away they went, and closely shut the door;
          When Richard said, thou darling of my store,
          How can'st thou thus behave? my pretty dove,
          'Tis thy Quinzica, come to seek his love,
          In all the same, except about his wife;
          Dost in this face a change observe my life?
          'Tis grieving for thy loss that makes me ill;
          Did ever I in aught deny thy will?
          In dress or play could any thee exceed?
          And had'st thou not whatever thou might'st need?
          To please thee, oft I made myself a slave;
          Such thou art now; but thee again I crave.
          Then what dost think about thy honour, dear?--
          Said she, with ire, I neither know nor fear;
          Is this a time to guard it, do you say?
          What pain was shown by any one, I pray;
          When I was forc'd to wed a man like you,
          Old, impotent, and hateful to the view,
          While I was young and blooming as the morn,
          Deserving truly, something less forlorn,
          And seemingly intended to possess
          What Hymen best in store has got to bless;
          For I was thought by all the world around,
          Most worthy ev'ry bliss in wedlock found.

          YET things took quite another turn with me
          In tune my husband never proved to be,
          Except a feast or two throughout the year;
          From Pagamin I met a diff'rent cheer;
          Another lesson presently he taught;
          The life's sweet pleasures more the pirate brought,
          In two short days, than e'er I had from you
          In those four years that only you I knew.

          PRAY leave me husband:--let me have my will
          Insist not on my living with you still;
          No calendars with Pagamin are seen--
          Far better treated with the man I've been.
          My other friends and you much worse deserved:
          The spouse, for taking me when quite unnerved,
          And they, for giving preference base to gold,
          To those pure joys--far better thought than told.
          But Pagamin in ev'ry way can please;
          And though no code he owns, yet all is ease;
          Himself will tell you what has passed this morn,
          His actions would a sov'reign prince adorn.
          Such information may excite surprise,
          But now the truth, 'twere useless to disguise,
          Nothing will gain belief, we've no one near
          To witness our discourse:--adieu, my dear,
          To all your festivals--I'm flesh and blood:--
          Gems, dresses, ornaments, do little good;
          You know full well, betwixt the head and heel,
          Though little's said, yet much we often feel.
          On this she stopt, and Richard dropt his chin,
          Rejoiced to 'scape from such unwelcome din.

          BARTHOLOMEA, pleased with what had passed;
          No disposition showed to hold him fast;
          The downcast husband felt such poignant grief,
          With ills where age can scarcely hope relief,
          That soon he left this busy stage of life,
          And Pagamin the widow took to wife.
          The deed was just, for neither of the two
          E'er felt what oft in Richard rose to view;
          From feeling proof arose their mutual choice;
          And 'tween them ne'er was heard the jarring voice.

          BEHOLD a lesson for the aged man;
          Who thinks, when old, to act as he began;
          But, if the sage a yielding dotard seems,
          His work is done by those the wife esteems;
          Complaints are never heard; no thrilling fears;
          And ev'ry one around at ease appears.






                     THE AVARICIOUS WIFE AND
                        TRICKING GALLANT

          WHO knows the world will never feel surprise,
          When men are duped by artful women's eves;
          Though death his weapon freely will unfold;
          Love's pranks, we find, are ever ruled by gold.
          To vain coquettes I doubtless here allude;
          But spite of arts with which they're oft endued;
          I hope to show (our honour to maintain,)
          We can, among a hundred of the train,
          Catch one at least, and play some cunning trick:--
          For instance, take blithe Gulphar's wily nick,
          Who gained (old soldier-like) his ardent aim,
          And gratis got an avaricious dame.

          LOOK well at this, ye heroes of the sword,
          Howe'er with wily freaks your heads be stored,
          Beyond a doubt, at court I now could find,
          A host of lovers of the Gulphar kind.

          To Gasperin's so often went our wight,
          The wife at length became his sole delight,
          Whose youth and beauty were by all confessed;
          But, 'midst these charms, such av'rice she possessed,
          The warmest love was checked--a thing not rare,
          In modern times at least, among the FAIR.
          'Tis true, as I've already said, with such
          Sighs naught avail, and promises not much;
          Without a purse, who wishes should express,
          Would vainly hope to gain a soft caress.
          The god of love no other charm employs,
          Then cards, and dress, and pleasure's cheering joys;
          From whose gay shops more cuckolds we behold,
          Than heroes sallied from Troy's horse of old.

          BUT to our lady's humour let's adhere;
          Sighs passed for naught: they entered not her ear;
          'Twas speaking only would the charmer please,
          The reader, without doubt, my meaning sees;
          Gay Gulphar plainly spoke, and named a sum
          A hundred pounds, she listened:--was o'ercome.

          OUR wight the cash by Gasperin was lent;
          And then the husband to the country went,
          Without suspecting that his loving mate,
          Designed with horns to ornament his pate.

          THE money artful Gulphar gave the dame,
          While friends were round who could observe the same;
          Here, said the spark, a hundred pounds receive,
          'Tis for your spouse:--the cash with you I leave.
          The lady fancied what the swain had said,
          Was policy, and to concealment led.

          NEXT morn our belle regaled the arch gallant,
          Fulfilled his promise:--and his eager want.
          Day after day he followed up the game;
          For cash he took, and int'rest on the same;
          Good payers get, we always may conclude,
          Full measure served, whatever is pursued.

          WHEN Gasperin returned, our crafty wight,
          Before the wife addressed her spouse at sight;
          Said he the cash I've to your lady paid,
          Not having (as I feared) required its aid;
          To save mistakes, pray cross it in your book;
          The lady, thunderstruck, with terror shook;
          Allowed the payment; 'twas a case too clear;
          In truth for character she 'gan to fear.
          But most howe'er she grudged the surplus joy,
          Bestowed on such a vile, deceitful boy.

          THE loss was doubtless great in ev'ry view
          Around the town the wicked Gulphar flew;
          In all the streets, at every house to tell,
          How nicely he had trick'd the greedy belle.

          To blame him useless 'twere you must allow;
          The French such frolicks readily avow.






                     THE JEALOUS HUSBAND

          A CERTAIN husband who, from jealous fear,
          With one eye slept while t'other watched his dear,
          Deprived his wife of every social joy,
          (Friends oft the jealous character annoy,)
          And made a fine collection in a book,
          Of tricks with which the sex their wishes hook.
          Strange fool! as if their wiles, to speak the truth,
          Were not a hydra, both in age and youth.

          HIS wife howe'er engaged his constant cares;
          He counted e'en the number of her hairs;
          And kept a hag who followed every hour,
          Where'er she went, each motion to devour;
          Duenna like, true semblance of a shade,
          That never quits, yet moves as if afraid.

          THIS arch collection, like a prayer-book bound;
          Was in the blockhead's pocket always found,
          The form religious of the work, he thought,
          Would prove a charm 'gainst vice whenever sought!

          ONE holy day, it happened that our dame,
          As from the neighb'ring church she homeward came;
          And passed a house, some wight, concealed from view;
          A basket full of filth upon her threw.

          WITH anxious care apologies were made;
          The lady, frightened by the frolick played,
          Quite unsuspicious to the mansion went;
          Her aged friend for other clothes she sent,
          Who hurried home, and ent'ring out of breath;
          Informed old hunks--what pained him more than death

          ZOUNDS! cried the latter, vainly I may look
          To find a case like this within my book;
          A dupe I'm made, and nothing can be worse:--
          Hell seize the work--'tis thoroughly a curse!

          NOT wrong he proved, for, truly to confess;
          This throwing dirt upon the lady's dress
          Was done to get the hag, with Argus' eyes
          Removed a certain distance from the prize.
          The gay gallant, who watched the lucky hour,
          Felt doubly blessed to have her in his power.

          HOW vain our schemes to guard the wily sex!
          Oft plots we find, that ev'ry sense perplex.
          Go, jealous husbands, books of cases burn;
          Caresses lavish, and you'll find return.






                       THE GASCON PUNISHED

          A GASCON (being heard one day to swear,
          That he'd possess'd a certain lovely fair,)
          Was played a wily trick, and nicely served;
          'Twas clear, from truth he shamefully had swerved:
          But those who scandal propagate below,
          Are prophets thought, and ev'ry action know;
          While good, if spoken, scarcely is believed,
          And must be viewed, or not for truth received.

          THE dame, indeed, the Gascon only jeered,
          And e'er denied herself when he appeared;
          But when she met the wight, who sought to shine;
          And called her angel, beauteous and divine,
          She fled and hastened to a female friend,
          Where she could laugh, and at her ease unbend.

          NEAR Phillis, (our fair fugitive) there dwelled
          One Eurilas, his nearest neighbour held;
          His wife was Cloris; 'twas with her our dove
          Took shelter from the Gascon's forward love,
          Whose name was Dorilas; and Damon young,
          (The Gascon's friend) on whom gay Cloris hung.

          SWEET Phillis, by her manner, you might see,
          From sly amours and dark intrigues was free;
          The value to possess her no one knew,
          Though all admired the lovely belle at view.
          Just twenty years she counted at the time,
          And now a widow was, though in her prime,
          (Her spouse, an aged dotard, worth a plum:--
          Of those whose loss to mourn no tears e'er come.)

          OUR seraph fair, such loveliness possessed,
          In num'rous ways a Gascon could have blessed;
          Above, below, appeared angelic charms;
          'Twas Paradise, 'twas Heav'n, within her arms!

          THE Gascon was--a Gascon;--would you more?
          Who knows a Gascon knows at least a score.
          I need not say what solemn vows he made;
          Alike with Normans Gascons are portrayed;
          Their oaths, indeed, won't pass for Gospel truth;
          But we believe that Dorilas (the youth)
          Loved Phillis to his soul, our lady fair,
          Yet he would fain be thought successful there.

          ONE day, said Phillis, with unusual glee,
          Pretending with the Gascon to be free:--
          A favour do me:--nothing very great;
          Assist to dupe one jealous of his mate;
          You'll find it very easy to be done,
          And doubtless 'twill produce a deal of fun.
          'Tis our request (the plot you'll say is deep,)
          That you this night with Cloris's husband sleep
          Some disagreement with her gay gallant
          Requires, that she a night at least should grant,
          To settle diff'rences; now we desire,
          That you'll to bed with Eurilas retire,
          There's not a doubt he'll think his Cloris near;
          He never touches her:--so nothing fear;
          For whether jealousy, or other pains,
          He constantly from intercourse abstains,
          Snores through the night, and, if a cap he sees,
          Believes his wife in bed, and feels at ease.
          We'll properly equip you as a belle,
          And I will certainly reward you well.

          TO gain but Phillis's smiles, the Gascon said,
          He'd with the very devil go to bed.

          THE night arrived, our wight the chamber traced;
          The lights extinguished; Eurilas, too, placed;
          The Gascon 'gan to tremble in a trice,
          And soon with terror grew as cold as ice;
          Durst neither spit nor cough; still less encroach;
          And seemed to shrink, least t'other should approach;
          Crept near the edge; would scarcely room afford,
          And could have passed the scabbard of a sword.

          OFT in the night his bed-fellow turned round;
          At length a finger on his nose he found,
          Which Dorilas exceedingly distressed;
          But more inquietude was in his breast,
          For fear the husband amorous should grow,
          From which incalculable ills might flow.

          OUR Gascon ev'ry minute knew alarm;
          'Twas now a leg stretched out, and then an arm;
          He even thought he felt the husband's beard;
          But presently arrived what more he feared.

          A BELL, conveniently, was near the bed,
          Which Eurilas to ring was often led;
          At this the Gascon swooned, so great his fear,
          And swore, for ever he'd renounce his dear.
          But no one coming, Eurilas, once more,
          Resumed his place, and 'gan again to snore.

          AT length, before the sun his head had reared;
          The door was opened, and a torch appeared.
          Misfortune then he fancied full in sight;
          More pleased he'd been to rise without a light,
          And clearly thought 'twas over with him now;
          The flame approached;--the drops ran o'er his brow;
          With terror he for pardon humbly prayed:--
          You have it, cried a fair: be not dismayed;
          'Twas Phillis spoke, who Eurilas's place
          Had filled, throughout the night, with wily grace,
          And now to Damon and his Cloris flew,
          With ridicule the Gascon to pursue;
          Recounted all the terrors and affright,
          Which Dorilas had felt throughout the night.
          To mortify still more the silly swain,
          And fill his soul with ev'ry poignant pain,
          She gave a glimpse of beauties to his view,
          And from his presence instantly withdrew.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Caresses lavish, and you'll find return
While good, if spoken, scarcely is believed







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 04 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


