The Project Gutenberg eBook of Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 17
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 17

Author: Jean de La Fontaine


        
Release date: March 1, 2004 [eBook #5291]
                Most recently updated: December 28, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/5291

Credits: This eBook was produced by David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 17 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





                     THE TALES AND NOVELS
                              OF
                      J. DE LA FONTAINE



          Volume 17.

          Contains:
            The Progress of Wit
            The Sick Abbess
            The Truckers



                    THE PROGRESS OF WIT


          DIVERTING in extreme there is a play,
          Which oft resumes its fascinating sway;
          Delights the sex, or ugly, fair, or sour;
          By night or day:--'tis sweet at any hour.
          The frolick, ev'ry where is known to fame;
          Conjecture if you can, and tells its name.

          THIS play's chief charm to husbands is unknown;
          'Tis with the lover it excels alone;
          No lookers-on, as umpires, are required;
          No quarrels rise, though each appears inspired;
          All seem delighted with the pleasing game:--
          Conjecture if you can, and tell its name.

          BE this as 'twill, and called whate'er it may;
          No longer trifling with it I shall stay,
          But now disclose a method to transmit
          (As oft we find) to ninnies sense and wit.
          Till Alice got instruction in this school,
          She was regarded as a silly fool,
          Her exercise appeared to spin and sew:--
          Not hers indeed, the hands alone would go;
          For sense or wit had in it no concern;
          Whate'er the foolish girl had got to learn,
          No part therein could ever take the mind;
          Her doll, for thought, was just as well designed.
          The mother would, a hundred times a day,
          Abuse the stupid maid, and to her say
          Go wretched lump and try some wit to gain.

          THE girl, quite overcome with shame and pain;
          Her neighbours asked to point her out the spot,
          Where useful wit by purchase might be got.
          The simple question laughter raised around;
          At length they told her, that it might be found
          With father Bonadventure, who'd a stock,
          Which he at times disposed of to his flock.

          AWAY in haste she to the cloister went,
          To see the friar she was quite intent,
          Though trembling lest she might disturb his ease;
          And one of his high character displease.
          The girl exclaimed, as on she moved,--Will he
          Such presents willingly bestow on me,
          Whose age, as yet, has scarcely reached fifteen?
          With such can I be worthy to be seen?
          Her innocence much added to her charms,
          The gentle wily god of soft alarms
          Had not a youthful maiden in his book,
          That carried more temptation in her look.

          MOST rev'rend sir, said she, by friends I'm told,
          That in this convent wit is often sold,
          Will you allow me some on trust to take?
          My treasure won't afford that much I stake;
          I can return if more I should require;
          Howe'er, you'll take this pledge I much desire;
          On which she tried to give the monk a ring,
          That to her finger firmly seemed to cling.

          BUT when the friar saw the girl's design,
          He cried, good maid, the pledge we will decline,
          And what is wished, provide for you the same;
          'Tis merchandize, and whatsoe'er its fame,
          To some 'tis freely giv'n:--to others taught
          If not too dear, oft better when 'tis bought.
          Come in and boldly follow where I lead;
          None round can see: you've nothing here to heed;
          They're all at prayers; the porter's at my will;
          The very walls, of prudence have their fill.

          SHE entered as the holy monk desired,
          And they together to his cell retired.
          The friar on the bed this maiden threw;
          A kiss would take:--she from him rather drew;
          And said.--To give one wit is this the way?
          Yes, answered he, and round her 'gan to play:
          Upon her bosom then he put his hand
          What now, said she, am I to understand?
          Is this the way?--Said he, 'tis so decreed;
          Then patiently she let the monk proceed,
          Who followed up, from point to point, his aim;
          And wit, by easy steps, advancing came,
          Till its progression with her was complete;
          Then Alice laughed, success appeared so sweet.

          A SECOND dose the friar soon bestowed,
          And e'en a third, so fast his bounty flowed.
          Well, said the monk, pray how d'ye find the play?
          The girl replied: wit will not long delay;
          'Twill soon arrive; but then I fear its flight:
          I'm half afraid 'twill leave me ere 'tis night.
          We'll see, rejoined the priest, that naught you lose;
          But other secrets oftentimes we use.
          Seek not those the smiling girl replied
          With this most perfectly I'm satisfied;
          Then be it so, said he, we'll recommence,
          Nor longer keep the business in suspense,
          But to the utmost length at once advance;
          For this fair Alice showed much complaisance:
          The secret by the friar was renewed;
          Much pleasure in it Bonadventure viewed;
          The belle a courtesy dropt, and then retired,
          Reflecting on the wit she had acquired;
          Reflecting, do you say?--To think inclined?
          Yes, even more:--she sought excuse to find,
          Not doubting that she should be forced to say,
          Some cause for keeping her so long away.

          TWO days had passed, when came a youthful friend;
          Fair Nancy with her often would unbend;
          Howe'er, so very thoughtful Alice seemed,
          That Nancy (who was penetrating deemed)
          Was well convinced whatever Alice sought,
          So very absent she was not for naught.
          In questioning she managed with such art,
          That soon she learned--what Alice could impart
          To listen she was thoroughly disposed,
          While t'other ev'ry circumstance disclosed,
          From first to last, each point and mystick hit,
          And e'en the largeness of the friar's wit,
          The repetitions, and the wondrous skill
          With which he managed ev'ry thing at will.

          BUT now, cried Alice, favour me I pray,
          And tell at once, without reserve, the way
          That you obtained such wit as you possess,
          And all particulars to me confess.

          IF I, said Nancy, must avow the truth,
          Your brother Alan was the bounteous youth,
          Who me obliged therewith, and freely taught,
          What from the holy friar you'd have bought.
          My brother Alan!--Alan! Alice cried;
          He ne'er with any was himself supplied;
          I'm all surprise; he's thought a heavy clot,
          How could he give what he had never got?

          FOOL! said the other, little thou can'st know;
          For once, to me some information owe;
          In such a case much skill is not required,
          And Alan freely gave what I desired.
          If me thou disbeliev'st, thy mother ask;
          She thoroughly can undertake the task.

          ON such a point we readily should say,
          Long live the fools who wit so well display!






                       THE SICK ABBESS


          EXAMPLE often proves of sov'reign use;
          At other times it cherishes abuse;
          'Tis not my purpose, howsoe'er, to tell
          Which of the two I fancy to excel.
          Some will conceive the Abbess acted right,
          While others think her conduct very light
          Be that as 'twill, her actions right or wrong,
          I'll freely give a license to my tongue,
          Or pen, at all events, and clearly show,
          By what some nuns were led to undergo,
          That flocks are equally of flesh and blood,
          And, if one passes, hundreds stem the flood,
          To follow up the course the first has run,
          And imitate what t'other has begun.
          When Agnes passed, another sister came,
          And ev'ry nun desired to do the same;
          At length the guardian of the flock appeared,
          And likewise passed, though much at first she feared.
          The tale is this, we purpose to relate;
          And full particulars we now will state.

          AN Abbess once a certain illness had,
          Chlorosis named, which oft proves very bad,
          Destroys the rose that decorates the cheek,
          And renders females languid, pale, and weak.
          Our lady's face was like a saint's in Lent:
          Quite wan, though otherwise it marked content.
          The faculty, consulted on her case,
          And who the dire disorder's source would trace,
          At length pronounced slow fever must succeed,
          And death inevitably be decreed,
          Unless;--but this unless is very strange
          Unless indeed she some way could arrange;
          To gratify her wish, which seemed to vex,
          And converse be allowed with t'other sex:
          Hippocrates, howe'er, more plainly speaks,
          No circumlocutory phrase he seeks.

          O JESUS! quite abashed the Abbess cried;
          What is it?--fy!--a man would you provide?
          Yes, they rejoined, 'tis clearly what you want,
          And you will die without a brisk gallant;
          One truly able will alone suffice;
          And, if not such, take two we would advise.
          This still was worse, though, if we rightly guess,
          'Twas by her wished, durst she the truth confess.
          But how the sisterhood would see her take
          Such remedies and no objection make?
          Shame often causes injury and pain;
          And ills concealed bring others in their train.

          SAID sister Agnes, Madam, take their word;
          A remedy like this would be absurd,
          If, like old death, it had a haggard look,
          And you designed to get by hook or crook.
          A hundred secrets you retain at ease;
          Can one so greatly shock and you displease?--
          You talk at random, Agnes, she replied;
          Now, would you for the remedy decide,
          Upon your word, if you were in my place?--
          Yes, madam, said the nun, and think it grace;
          Still more I'd do, if necessary thought;
          Your health, by me, would ev'ry way be sought,
          And, if required by you to suffer this,
          Not one around would less appear remiss;
          Sincere affection for you I have shown,
          And my regard I'll ever proudly own.

          A THOUSAND thanks the Abbess gave her friend;
          The doctors said:--no use for them to send;
          Throughout the convent sad distress appeared;
          When Agnes, who to sage advice adhered,
          And was not thought the weakest head around,
          A kinder soul perhaps could not be found,
          Said to the sisterhood,--What now retains
          Our worthy Abbess, and her will enchains,
          Is nothing but the shame of pow'rs divine,
          Or else, to what's prescribed she would resign.
          Through charity will no one take the lead,
          And, by example, get her to proceed?

          THE counsel was by ev'ry one approved,
          And commendation through the circle moved.

          IN this design not one, nor grave, nor old,
          Nor young, nor prioress, at all seemed cold;
          Notes flew around, and friends of worth and taste,
          The black, the fair, the brown, appeared in haste;
          The number was not small, our records say,
          Not (what might be) appearance of delay,
          But all most anxious seemed the road to show,
          And what the Abbess feared, at once to know;
          None more sincerely 'mong the nuns desired,
          That shame should not prevent what was required.
          Nor that the Abbess should, within her soul,
          Retain what might injuriously control.

          NO sooner one among the flock had made
          The step, of which the Abbess was afraid,
          But other sisters followed in the train:--
          Not one behind consented to remain;
          Each forward pressed, in dread to be the last;
          At length, from prejudice the Abbess passed;
          To such examples she at last gave way,
          And, to a youth, no longer offered nay.

          THE operation o'er, her lily face
          Resumed the rose, and ev'ry other grace.
          O remedy divine, prescription blessed!
          Thy friendly aid to numbers stands confessed;
          The friends of thousands, friend of nature too;
          The friend of all, except where honour 's due.
          This point of honour is another ill,
          In which the faculty confess no skill.

          WHAT ills in life! what mis'ries dire around,
          While remedies so easy may be found!






                       THE TRUCKERS


          THE change of food enjoyment is to man;
          In this, t'include the woman is my plan.
          I cannot guess why Rome will not allow
          Exchange in wedlock, and its leave avow;
          Not ev'ry time such wishes might arise,
          But, once in life at least, 'twere not unwise;
          Perhaps one day we may the boon obtain;
          Amen, I say: my sentiments are plain;
          The privilege in France may yet arrive
          There trucking pleases, and exchanges thrive;
          The people love variety, we find;
          And such by heav'n was ere for them designed.

          ONCE there dwelled, near Rouen, (sapient clime)
          Two villagers, whose wives were in their prime,
          And rather pleasing in their shape and mien,
          For those in whom refinement 's scarcely seen.
          Each looker-on conceives, LOVE needs not greet
          Such humble wights, as he would prelates treat.

          IT happened, howsoe'er, both weary grown,
          Of halves that they so long had called their own;
          One holyday, with them there chanced to drink
          The village lawyer (bred in Satan's sink);
          To him, said one of these, with jeering air,
          Good mister Oudinet, a strange affair
          Is in my head: you've doubtless often made
          Variety of contracts; 'tis your trade:
          Now, cannot you contrive, by one of these,
          That men should barter wives, like goods, at ease?
          Our pastor oft his benefice has changed;
          Is trucking wives less easily arranged?
          It cannot be, for well I recollect,
          That Parson Gregory (whom none suspect)
          Would always say, or much my mem'ry fails,
          My flock 's my wife: love equally prevails;
          He changed; let us, good neighbour do the same;
          With all my heart, said t'other, that's my aim;
          But well thou know'st that mine's the fairest face,
          And, Mister Oudinet, since that's the case,
          Should he not add, at least, his mule to boot?
          My mule? rejoined the first, that will not suit;
          In this world ev'ry thing has got its price:
          Mine I will change for thine and that 's concise.
          Wives are not viewed so near; naught will I add;
          Why, neighbour Stephen, dost thou think me mad,
          To give my mule to boot?--of mules the king;
          Not e'en an ass I'd to the bargain bring;
          Change wife for wife, the barter will be fair;
          Then each will act with t'other on the square.

          THE village lawyer now the friends addressed:
          Said he, Antoinetta is confessed
          To have superior charms to those of Jane;
          But still, if I may venture to be plain,
          Not always is the best what meets the eye,
          For many beauties in concealment lie,
          Which I prefer; and these are hid with care;
          Deceptions, too, are practised by the FAIR;
          Howe'er, we wish the whole to be disclosed,
          Too much, 'tis said, they must not be exposed.

          NOW, neighbours, let us fair arrangement make:
          A pig in poke you'd neither give nor take;
          Confront these halves in nature's birth-day suit;
          To neither, then, will you deceit impute.
          The project was most thoroughly approved;
          Like inclination both the husbands moved.

          ANTOINETTA, said the second spouse,
          Has neither ill nor scratch her fears to rouse.
          Jane, cried the first, is ev'ry way complete;
          No freckles on the skin: as balm she's sweet:
          Antoinetta is, her spouse replied,
          Ambrosia ev'ry way: no fault to hide.

          SAID t'other:--Don't so confident appear;
          Thou know'st not Jane: her ways would marble cheer;
          And there's a play:--thou understand'st no doubt?
          To this rejoined the second village lout,
          One diff'rence only have my wife and I:
          Which plays the prettiest wiles is what we try;
          Thou'lt very soon of these know how to think;
          Here's to thee, neighbour; Mister Oud'net, drink;
          Come, toast Antoinetta; likewise Jane;
          The mule was granted, and the bargain plain:
          Our village lawyer promised to prepare,
          At once, the writings, which would all declare.
          This Oudinet a good apostle proved
          Well paid for parchment, or he never moved:
          By whom was payment made?--by both the dames;
          On neither husband showed he any claims.

          THE village clowns some little time supposed
          That all was secret: not a hint disclosed;
          The parson of it, howsoe'er, obtained
          Some intimation, and his off'rings gained.
          I was not present, fully I admit;
          But rarely clergymen their dues will quit.
          The very clerk would not remit his fee:--
          All those who serve the church in this agree.

          THE permutation could not well be made,
          But scandal would such practices upbraid;
          In country villages each step is seen;
          Thus, round the whisper went of what had been,
          And placed at length the thorn where all was ease;
          The pow'rs divine alone it could displease.
          'Twas pleasant them together to behold;
          The wives, in emulation, were not cold;
          In easy talk they'd to each other say:
          How pleasing to exchange from day to day!
          What think you, neighbour, if, to try our luck,
          For once we've something new, and valets truck?
          This last, if made, the secret had respect;
          The other had at first a good effect.

          FOR one good month the whole proceeded well;
          But, at the end, disgust dispersed the spell;
          And neighbour Stephen, as we might suppose,
          Began dissatisfaction to disclose;
          Lamented much Antoinetta's stop;
          No doubt he was a loser by the swop;
          Yet neighbour Giles expressed extreme regret,
          That t'other from him ought to boot should get:
          Howe'er, he would retrucking not consent,
          So much he otherwise appeared content.

          IT happened on a day, as Stephen strayed
          Within a wood, he saw, beneath a shade,
          And near the stream, asleep, and quite alone,
          Antoinetta, whom he wished his own.
          He near her drew, and waked her with surprise;
          The change ne'er struck her when she ope'd her eyes;
          The gay gallant advantage quickly took,
          And, what he wished, soon placed within his hook.
          'Tis said, he found her better than at first;
          Why so? you ask: was she then at the worst?
          A curious question, truly, you've designed;
          In Cupid's am'rous code of laws you'll find--
          Bread got by stealth, and eat where none can spy,
          Is better far than what you bake or buy;
          For proof of this, ask those most learn'd in love
          Truth we prefer, all other things above;
          Yet Hymen, and the god of soft desire,
          How much soe'er their union we admire,
          Are not designed together bread to bake;
          In proof, the sleeping scene for instance take.
          Good cheer was there: each dish was served with taste;
          The god of love, who often cooks in haste,
          Most nicely seasoned things to relish well;
          In this he's thought old Hymen to excel.

          ANTOINETTA, to his clasp restored,
          Our neighbour Stephen, who his wife adored,
          Quite raw, howe'er, in this, exclaimed apart
          Friend Giles has surely got some secret art,
          For now my rib displays superior charms,
          To what she had, before she left my arms.
          Let's take her back, and play the Norman trick
          Deny the whole, and by our priv'lege stick.

          IMMEDIATELY he ev'ry effort tried,
          To get the bargain fully set aside.
          Giles, much distressed, exerted all his might,
          To keep his prize, and prove his conduct right.
          The cause was carried to the bishop's court;
          Much noise it made, according to report.
          At length the parliament would hear the claim,
          And judge a case of such peculiar fame.

          THE village lawyer, Oudinet, was brought;
          From him, who drew the contract, truth was sought;
          There rests the cause, for 'tis of recent date;
          While undecided, more we cannot state.

          HOW silly neighbour Stephen must appear!
          He went against his int'rest now 'tis clear;
          For, when superior pleasure he was shown,
          The fascinating fair was not his own.
          Good sense would whisper then, 'twere full as well,
          To let remain with Giles the beauteous belle;
          Save now and then, within the leafy shade,
          Where oft Antoinetta visits made,
          And warbled to the shrubs and trees around;
          There he might easily the nymph have found,
          But, if with ease it could not be obtained,
          Still greater pleasure he would then have gained.

          GO preach me this to silly country louts;
          These, howsoe'er, had managed well their bouts,
          It must not be denied, and all was nice;
          To do the like perhaps 'twill some entice.
          I much regret my lot was not the same,
          Though doubtless many will my wishes blame.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Her doll, for thought, was just as well designed
How could he give what he had never got?
In country villages each step is seen







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 17 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


