The Project Gutenberg eBook of Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 23
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 23

Author: Jean de La Fontaine


        
Release date: March 1, 2004 [eBook #5297]
                Most recently updated: December 28, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/5297

Credits: This eBook was produced by David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 23 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





                     THE TALES AND NOVELS
                              OF
                      J. DE LA FONTAINE



          Volume 23.

          Contains:
             The River Scamander
             The Confidant Without Knowing It,
                 or The Strategem
             The Clyster



                     THE RIVER SCAMANDER


          I'M now disposed to give a pretty tale;
          Love laughs at what I've sworn and will prevail;
          Men, gods, and all, his mighty influence know,
          And full obedience to the urchin show.
          In future when I celebrate his flame,
          Expressions not so warm will be my aim;
          I would not willingly abuses plant,
          But rather let my writings spirit want.
          If in these verses I around should twirl,
          Some wily knave and easy simple girl,
          'Tis with intention in the breast to place;
          On such occasions, dread of dire disgrace;
          The mind to open, and the sex to set
          Upon their guard 'gainst snares so often met.
          Gross ignorance a thousand has misled,
          For one that has been hurt by what I've said.

          I'VE read that once, an orator renowned
          In Greece, where arts superior then were found,
          By law's severe decree, compelled to quit
          His country, and to banishment submit,
          Resolved that he a season would employ,
          In visiting the site of ancient Troy.
          His comrade, Cymon, with him thither went,
          To view those ruins, we so oft lament.
          A hamlet had been raised from Ilion's wall,
          Ennobled by misfortune and its fall;
          Where now mere names are Priam and his court;
          Of all devouring Time the prey and sport.

          O TROY! for me thy very name has got
          Superior charms:--in story fruitful spot;
          Thy famed remains I ne'er can hope to view,
          That gods by labour raised, and gods o'erthrew;
          Those fields where daring acts of valour shone;
          So many fights were lost:--so many won.

          BUT to resume my thread, and not extend
          Too much the subjects which our plan suspend;
          This Cymon, who's the hero of our tale,
          When walking near the banks that form the dale
          Through which Scamander's waters freely flow,
          Observed a youthful charmer thither go,
          To breathe the cool refreshing breeze around;
          That on its verdant borders oft she'd found.
          Her veil was floating, and her artless dress,
          A shepherdess seemed clearly to express.
          Tall, elegantly formed, with beauteous mien,
          And ev'ry feature lovely to be seen,
          Young Cymon felt emotion and surprise,
          And thought 'twas Venus that had caught his eyes,
          Who on the river's side her charms displayed,
          Those wondrous treasures all perfection made.

          A GROT was nigh, to which the simple fair,
          Not dreaming ills, was anxious to repair;
          The heat, some evil spirit, and the place,
          Invited her the moment to embrace,
          To bathe within the stream that near her ran;
          And instantly her project she began.

          THE spark concealed himself; each charm admired;
          Now this, now that, now t'other feature fired;
          A hundred beauties caught his eager sight;
          And while his bosom felt supreme delight,
          He turned his thoughts advantages to take,
          And of the maiden's error something make;
          Assumed the character, and dress; and air;
          That should a wat'ry deity declare;
          Within the gliding flood his vestments dipt:
          A crown of rushes on his head he slipt;
          Aquatick herbs and plants around he twined:
          Then Mercury intreated to be kind,
          And Cupid too, the wily god of hearts;
          How could the innocent resist these arts?

          AT length a foot so fair the belle exposed,
          E'en Galatea never such disclosed;
          The stream, that glided by, received the prize;
          Her lilies she beheld with downcast eyes,
          And, half ashamed, herself surveyed at ease,
          While round the zephyrs wantoned in the breeze.

          WHEN thus engaged, the lover near her drew;
          At whose approach away the damsel flew,
          And tried to hide within the rocky cell;
          Cried Cymon, I beneath these waters dwell,
          And o'er their course a sov'reign right maintain;
          Be goddess of the flood, and with me reign;
          Few rivers could with you like pow'rs divide;
          My crystal's clear: in me you may confide;
          My heart is pure; with flow'rs I'll deck the stream,
          If worthy of yourself the flood you deem;
          Too happy should this honour you bestow,
          And with me, 'neath the current, freely go.
          Your fair companions, ev'ry one I'll make
          A nymph of fountains, hill, or grove, or lake;
          My pow'r is great, extending far around
          Where'er the eye can reach, 'tis fully found.

          THE eloquence he used, her fears and dread;
          Lest she might give offence by what she said,
          In spite of bashfulness that bliss alloys,
          Soon all concluded with celestial joys.
          'Tis even said that Cupid lent supplies;
          From superstition many things arise.

          THE spark withdrew, delighted by success;
          Return said he:--we'll mutually caress;
          But secret prove: let none our union learn;
          Concealment is to me of high concern;
          To make it publick would improper be,
          Till on Olympus' mount the gods we see,
          In council met, to whom I'll state the case;
          On this the new-made goddess left the place,
          In ev'ry thing contented as a dove,
          And fully witnessed by the god of love.
          Two months had passed, and not a person knew
          Their frequent meetings, pleasure to pursue.
          O mortals! is it true, as we are told,
          That ev'ry bliss at last is rendered cold?
          The sly gallant, though not a word he said,
          The grot to visit now was rarely led.

          AT length a wedding much attention caught;
          The lads and lasses of the hamlet sought,
          To see the couple pass: the belle perceived
          The very man for whom her bosom heaved,
          And loudly cried, behold Scamander's flood!
          Which raised surprise; soon numbers round her stood,
          Astonishment expressed, but still the fair,
          Whate'er was asked, would nothing more declare,
          Than, in the spacious, blue, ethereal sky,
          Her marriage would be soon, they might rely.
          A laugh prevailed; for what was to be done?
          The god with hasty steps away had run,
          And none with stones pursued his rapid flight:
          The deity was quickly ought of sight.

          WERE this to happen now, Scamander's stream
          Would not so easily preserve esteem;
          But crimes like these (whoever was abused),
          In former days, were easily excused.
          With time our maxims change, and what was then,
          Though wrong at present, may prevail agen.
          Scamander's spouse some raillery received;
          But in the end she fully was relieved:
          A lover e'en superior thought her charms,
          (His taste was such) and took her to his arms.
          The gods can nothing spoil! but should they cause
          A belle to lose a portion of applause,
          A handsome fortune give, and you'll behold,
          That ev'ry thing can be repaired by gold.






                A CONFIDANT WITHOUT KNOWING IT;
                             OR
                       THE STRATAGEM


          NO master sage, nor orator I know,
          Who can success, like gentle Cupid show;
          His ways and arguments are pleasing smiles,
          Engaging looks, soft tears, and winning wiles.
          Wars in his empire will at times arise,
          And, in the field, his standard meet the eyes;
          Now stealing secretly, with skilful lure.
          He penetrates to hearts supposed secure,
          O'erleaps the ramparts that protect around,
          And citadels reduces, most renowned.

          I DARE engage, two fortresses besiege
          Leave one to Mars, and t'other to this liege.
          And though the god of war should numbers bring,
          With all the arms that can his thunders fling,
          Before the fort he'll vainly waste his time,
          While Cupid, unattended, in shall climb,
          Obtain possession perfectly at ease,
          And grant conditions just as he shall please.

          I NOW propose to give a fav'rite tale :--
          The god of Love was never known to fail,
          In finding stratagems, as I have read,
          And many have I seen most nicely spread.

          THE young Aminta was Gerontes' wife,
          With whom she lived, it seems, a wretched life.
          Far better she deserved than what she had,
          For he was jealous, and his temper bad:
          An aged hunks, while she was in the hour
          When hearts, that never felt LOVE'S mighty pow'r,
          Are presently by tender objects caught,
          Which ne'er before had entered in the thought.

          WHEN first Aminta saw young Cleon's face,
          A lad possessing all engaging grace,
          Much prudence then she ev'ry way displayed,
          E'en more perhaps than necessary made.
          For though we may suppose the lovely fair,
          Would ev'ry effort use to 'scape the snare,
          Yet when the god of soft persuasion takes
          The fatal moment, havock soon he makes,
          In vain his duty, any thing opposed,
          If once the tender sentiment's disclosed.
          Aminta consolation had in view
          'Twas that alone the passion from her drew,
          A meeting innocent, to vent her tears,
          And, to a feeling friend, express her fears.
          'Tis represented thus I cannot doubt;
          But sight of meat brings appetite about;
          And if you would avoid the tempting bit,
          'Tis better far at table not to sit.

          AMINTA hoped to render Cleon kind;
          Poor innocent! as yet to dangers blind,
          These conversations she was led to deem,
          Mere friendly ways that raised sincere esteem;
          And this alone she ardently desired,
          Without supposing more would be required,
          Or any thing improper be the case:
          She'd rather die than suffer such disgrace.
          'Twas difficult the business to commence;
          A letter 's often lost, or gives offence,
          And many serious accidents arrive:
          To have a confidant 'twere better strive;
          But where could such a female friend be found?
          Gerontes dreaded was by all around.
          I've said already, Cupid will obtain,
          One way or t'other, what he wants to gain;
          And this will show the observation just
          The maxim's such as you may always trust.

          A FEMALE relative young Cleon had,
          A peevish prude, who looked upon the lad,
          As one she had a right to rule and scold;
          Her name was Mistress Alice: sour and old.

          ONE summer's day, Aminta to her said:
          I cannot think how 'tis, your cousin's led,
          (Though quite indifferent he is to me,
          And doubtless such will ever prove to be)
          With various fond attentions, to pretend,
          He loves me--much beyond a common friend.
          My window oft he passes day and night;
          I cannot move a step, but he's in sight,
          And in a moment at my heels appears;
          Notes, letters full of soft expressions, dears,
          To me are sent by one I will not name,
          For known to you, she would be thought to blame:
          Pray put an end to such a wild pursuit
          It nothing can produce but wretched fruit;
          My husband may take fire at things like these;
          And as to Cleon.--me he'll never please;
          I'll thank you to inform him what I say;
          Such steps are useless: folly they betray.

          MUCH praise Aminta from the dame received;
          Who promised that the conduct, which aggrieved;
          To Cleon she would mention, as desired,
          And reprimand him, as the fault required:
          So well would scold him, that she might be sure,
          From him in future she would be secure.

          THE foll'wing day our youth to Alice came;
          To pay a visit solely was his aim;
          She told him what Aminta had declared,
          And, in her lecture, words by no means spared.
          The lad, surprised, on oath the whole denied,
          And vowed to gain her love, he never tried.
          Old Alice called her cousin, imp of Hell;
          Said she, in all that's wicked, you excel;
          You will not all your base designs confess;
          The oaths are false on which you lay such stress,
          And punishment most richly you deserve;
          But false or true, from this I will not swerve,
          That you should recollect, Aminta 's chaste,
          And never will submit to be disgraced;
          Renounce her from this hour; no more pursue:--
          That easily, said Cleon, I can do;
          Away he went: the case considered o'er;
          But still the myst'ry he could not explore.

          THREE days had scarcely passed: Aminta came,
          To pay a visit to our ancient dame;
          Cried she I fear, you have not seen as yet,
          This youth, who worse and worse appears to get.
          Rage, Mistress Alice, instantly o'erspread,
          And ev'ry thing that's vile she of him said.

          NO sooner had Aminta gone away,
          But she for Cleon sent without delay.
          He presently appeared; yet to detail
          How Alice stormed, I certainly should fail;
          Unless an iron tongue I could obtain:
          All Hell was ransacked epithets to gain;
          And Lucifer and Beelzebub were used:
          No mortal ever was so much abused.

          QUITE terrified, poor lad, he scarcely knew;
          Her fury was so great, what best to do;
          If he allowed that he had acted wrong,
          'Twould wound his conscience and defile his tongue.
          He home repaired, and turning in his mind
          What he had heard, at length his thoughts inclined,
          To fancy that Aminta was disposed,
          To play some cunning trick, which, not disclosed,
          Would operate to bring her wish about;
          I see, said he, the scheme I should not doubt;
          It surely is my duty kind to be:
          Methinks I hear her freely say to me,
          O Cleon! show affection, I am yours;
          I love her too, for beauty that secures;
          And while her seraph charms my bosom fire;
          I equally the stratagem admire.
          Most freely howsoe'er I will confess,
          At first I was so dull, I could not guess
          At what she aimed, but now the object's plain:
          Aminta o'er my heart desires to reign.

          THIS minute, if I durst, I'd thither go,
          And, full of confidence, declare my woe,
          The subtle flame that burns without controul;
          What hurt to paint feelings of my soul?
          From balance of accounts 'twill both exempt:
          'Tis better far to love than show contempt.
          But should the husband find me in the house?--
          Ne'er think of that, and try the hunks to chouse.

          THEIR course had hardly run three other days,
          When fair Aminta, studious still of ways
          To have her wish, again to Alice came,
          To give dear Cleon notice of her flame.
          My home, cried she, 'tis requisite I leave:
          To ruin me, your cousin, I perceive,
          Is still resolved, for presents now he sends;
          But he mistakes, and blindly wealth expends;
          I'm clearly not the woman he suspects:
          See here, what jewels rare to please the sex!
          Nice rubies, diamonds too, but what is more,
          My portrait I have found among the store,
          Which must have been from memory designed,
          Since only with my husband that you'll find.

          WHEN I arose, this person known to you,
          Whose name I must conceal (to honour true),
          Arrived and brought me what I just have shown;
          The whole should at your cousin's head be thrown;
          And were he present:--but I'll curb my rage;
          Allow me to proceed, and you engage
          To hear the rest:--he word has also sent,
          That as to-day he knew my husband went
          On business to his cottage in the wood,
          Where he would sleep the night, he understood,
          No sooner should the servants be in bed,
          And Morpheus' robe be o'er their senses spread,
          But to my dressing room he would repair:--
          What can he hope, such project to declare?
          A meeting place indeed!--he must be mad;
          Were I not fearful 'twould affliction add
          To my old husband, I would set a watch,
          Who, at the entrance, should the villain catch;
          Or put him instantly to shame and flight;
          This said, she presently was out of sight.

          AN hour had passed when Cleon came anew;
          The jewels at him in a moment flew;
          And scarcely Mistress Alice could refrain,
          From wreaking further vengeance on the swain.
          Is this your plan? cried she; but what is worse,
          I find you still desire a greater curse;
          And then she told him all Aminta said,
          When last to visit her the fair was led.

          HIMSELF most fully warned the youth now thought;
          I loved, cried he, 'tis true; but that is naught,
          Since nothing from the belle I must expect:
          In future her completely I'll neglect.
          That is the line, said Alice, you should take;
          The lad howe'er was fully now awake,
          And thoroughly resolved to seek the dame,
          Whose cunning wiles had set him in a flame.

          THE, midnight hour the clock no sooner told;
          Than Cleon ran the myst'ry to unfold,
          And to the spot repaired, which he supposed,
          Aminta meant, from what had been disclosed;
          The place was well described, and there he found;
          Awaiting at the door, this belle renowned,
          Without attendants: sleep their eyes o'erspread:
          Behind thick clouds the very stars had fled:
          As all had been expected, in he went,
          Most thoroughly they both appeared content;
          Few words were used: in haste the pair withdrew,
          Where ev'ry wish at ease they might pursue.
          The smart gallant at once her beauty praised;
          His admiration presently was raised;
          Sweet kindness followed; charms were oft admired;
          And all was managed as their hearts desired.

          SAID youthful Cleon, now you'll tell me why
          This stratagem you were induced to try?
          For such before in love was never seen;
          'Tis excellent, and worthy Beauty's queen.
          A lovely blush o'erspread Aminta's face,
          And gave her lily-cheeks superior grace.
          He praised her person, artifice, and wit,
          And did whate'er the moments would admit.






                       THE CLYSTER


          IF truth give pleasure, surely we should try;
          To found our tales on what we can rely;
          Th' experiment repeatedly I've made,
          And seen how much realities persuade:
          They draw attention: confidence awake;
          Fictitious names however we should take,
          And then the rest detail without disguise:
          'Tis thus I mean to manage my supplies.

          IT happened then near Mans, a Normand town,
          For sapient people always of renown,
          A maid not long ago a lover had
          Brisk, pleasing, ev'ry way a handsome lad;
          The down as yet was scarcely on his chin;
          The girl was such as many wished to win:
          Had charms and fortune, all that was desired,
          And by the Mansian sparks was much admired;
          Around they swarmed, but vain was all their art
          Too much our youth possessed the damsel's heart.

          THE parents, in their wisdom, meant the fair
          Should marry one who was a wealthy heir;
          But she contrived to manage matters well;
          In spite of ev'ry thing which might repel,
          (I know not how) at length he had access;
          Though whether through indulgence or address,
          It matters not: perhaps his noble blood
          Might work a change when fully understood:
          The LUCKY, ev'ry thing contrives to please;
          The rest can nothing but misfortune seize.

          THE lover had success; the parents thought
          His merit such as prudence would have sought;
          What more to wish?--the miser's hoarded store:
          The golden age's wealth is now no more,
          A silly shadow, phantom of the brain;
          O happy time! I see indeed with pain,
          Thou wilt return:--in MAINE thou shalt arise;
          Thy innocence, we fondly may surmise,
          Had seconded our lover's ardent flame,
          And hastened his possession of the dame.

          THE slowness usually in parents found,
          Induced the girl, whose heart by LOVE was bound;
          To celebrate the Hymeneal scene,
          As in the statutes of Cythera's queen.
          Our legendary writers this define
          A present contract, where they nothing sign;
          The thing is common;--marriage made in haste:
          LOVE'S perparation: Hymen's bit for taste.


          NOT much examination Cupid made,
          As parent, lawyer, priest, he lent his aid,
          And soon concluded matters as desired;
          The Mansian wisdom no ways was required.

          OUR spark was satisfied, and with his belle,
          Passed nights so happy, nothing could excel;
          'Twere easy to explain;--the double keys,
          And gifts designed the chambermaid to please,
          Made all secure, and ev'ry joy abound;
          The soft delights with secrecy were crowned.

          IT happened that our fair one evening said,
          To her who of each infant step had led,
          But of the present secret nothing knew:--
          I feel unwell; pray tell me what to do.
          The other answered, you my dear must take
          A remedy that easily I'll make,
          A clyster you shall have to-morrow morn:
          By me most willingly it will be borne.

          WHEN midnight came the sly gallant appeared,
          Unluckily no doubt, but he revered
          The moments that so pleasantly were passed,
          Which always seemed, he thought, to glide too fast;
          Relief he sought, for ev'ry one below
          Is destined torments more or less to know.
          He not a word was told of things designed,
          And just as our gallant to sleep inclined,
          As oft's the case at length with lovers true,
          Quite open bright Aurora's portals flew,
          And with a smile the aged dame arrived;
          The apparatus properly contrived,
          Was in her hand, she hastened to the bed,
          And took the side that to the stripling led.

          OUR lady fair was instantly confused,
          Or she precaution properly had used,
          'Twas easy to have kept a steady face,
          And 'neath the clothes the other's head to place.
          Pass presently beyond the hidden swain,
          And t'other side with rapid motion gain,
          A thing quite natural, we should suppose;
          But fears o'erpow'red; the frightened damsel chose
          To hide herself, then whispered her gallant,
          What mighty terrors made her bosom pant.
          The youth was sage, and coolly undertook
          To offer for her:--t'other 'gan to look,
          With spectacles on nose: soon all went right;
          Adieu, she cried, and then withdrew from sight.
          Heav'n guard her steps, and all conduct away,
          Whose presence secret friendships would betray:

          SHOULD this be thought a silly, idle tale;
          (And that opinion may perhaps prevail)
          To censure me, enough will surely try,
          For criticks are severe, and these will cry,
          Your lady like a simpleton escaped;
          Her character you better might have shaped;
          Which makes us doubt the truth of what is told:
          Naught in your prologue like it we behold.

          'TWERE sueless to reply: 'twould endless prove:
          No arguments such censurers could move;
          On men like these, devoid of sense or taste,
          In vain might Cicero his rhet'rick waste.
          Sufficient 'tis for me, that what is here,
          I got from those who ev'ry-where appear
          The friends of truth:--let others say the same;
          What more would they expect should be my aim?




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Sight of meat brings appetite about
To avoid the tempting bit,  'Tis better far at table not to sit







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 23 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


