The Project Gutenberg eBook of Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 14
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 14

Author: Jean de La Fontaine


        
Release date: March 1, 2004 [eBook #5288]
                Most recently updated: December 28, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/5288

Credits: This eBook was produced by David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 14 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





                     THE TALES AND NOVELS
                              OF
                      J. DE LA FONTAINE



          Volume 14.

          Contains:
             The Countryman Who Sought His Calf
             Hans Carvel's Ring
             The Hermit
             The Convent Gardener of Lamporechio



              THE COUNTRYMAN WHO SOUGHT HIS CALF


          A COUNTRYMAN, one day, his calf had lost,
          And, seeking it, a neighbouring forest crossed;
          The tallest tree that in the district grew,
          He climbed to get a more extensive view.
          Just then a lady with her lover came;
          The place was pleasing, both to spark and dame;
          Their mutual wishes, looks and eyes expressed,
          And on the grass the lady was caressed.
          At sights of charms, enchanting to the eyes,
          The gay gallant exclaimed, with fond surprise:--
          Ye gods, what striking beauties now I see!
          No objects named; but spoke with anxious glee.
          The clod, who, on the tree had mounted high,
          And heard at ease the conversation nigh,
          Now cried:--Good man! who see with such delight;
          Pray tell me if my calf be in your sight?






                       HANS CARVEL'S RING


          HANS CARVEL took, when weak and late in life;
          A girl, with youth and beauteous charms to wife;
          And with her, num'rous troubles, cares and fears;
          For, scarcely one without the rest appears.
          Bab (such her name, and daughter of a knight)
          Was airy, buxom: formed for am'rous fight.
          Hans, holding jeers and cuckoldom in dread,
          Would have his precious rib with caution tread,
          And nothing but the Bible e'er peruse;
          All other books he daily would abuse;
          Blamed secret visits; frowned at loose attire;
          And censured ev'ry thing gallants admire.
          The dame, howe'er, was deaf to all he said;
          No preaching pleased but what to pleasure led,
          Which made the aged husband hold his tongue.
          And wish for death, since all round went wrong.
          Some easy moments he perhaps might get;
          A full detail in hist'ry's page is met.
          One night, when company he'd had to dine,
          And pretty well was fill'd with gen'rous wine,
          Hans dreamed, as near his wife he snoring lay,
          The devil came his compliments to pay,
          And having on his finger put a ring,
          Said he, friend Hans, I know thou feel'st a sting;
          Thy trouble 's great: I pity much thy case;
          Let but this ring, howe'er, thy finger grace,
          And while 'tis there I'll answer with my head,
          THAT ne'er shall happen which is now thy dread:
          Hans, quite delighted, forced his finger through;
          You drunken beast, cried Bab, what would you do?
          To love's devoirs quite lost, you take no care,
          And now have thrust your finger God knows where!






                           THE HERMIT


          WHEN Venus and Hypocrisy combine,
          Oft pranks are played that show a deep design;
          Men are but men, and friars full as weak:
          I'm not by Envy moved these truths to speak.
          Have you a sister, daughter, pretty wife?
          Beware the monks as you would guard your life;
          If in their snares a simple belle be caught:
          The trap succeeds: to ruin she is brought.
          To show that monks are knaves in Virtue's mask;
          Pray read my tale:--no other proof I ask.

          A HERMIT, full of youth, was thought around,
          A saint, and worthy of the legend found.
          The holy man a knotted cincture wore;
          But, 'neath his garb:--heart-rotten to the core.
          A chaplet from his twisted girdle hung,
          Of size extreme, and regularly strung,
          On t'other side was worn a little bell;
          The hypocrite in ALL, he acted well;
          And if a female near his cell appeared,
          He'd keep within as if the sex he feared,
          With downcast eyes and looks of woe complete,
          You'd ne'er suppose that butter he could eat.

          NOT far from where the hermit's cell was placed,
          Within a village dwelled a widow chaste;
          Her residence was at the further end
          And all her store--a daughter as a friend,
          Who candour, youth, and charms supreme possessed;
          And still a virgin lived, howe'er distressed.
          Though if the real truth perhaps we name,
          'Twas more simplicity than virtuous aim;
          Not much of industry, but honest heart;
          No wealth, nor lovers, who might hope impart.
          In Adam's days, when all with clothes were born,
          She doubtless might like finery have worn;
          A house was furnished then without expense;
          For sheets or mattresses you'd no pretence;
          Not e'en a bed was necessary thought
          No blankets, pillowbiers, nor quilts were bought.
          Those times are o'er; then Hymen came alone;
          But now a lawyer in his train is shown.

          OUR anchorite, in begging through the place;
          This girl beheld,--but not with eyes of grace.
          Said he, she'll do, and, if thou manag'st right,
          Lucius, at times, with her to pass the night.
          No time he lost, his wishes to secure:
          The means, we may suppose, not over pure.

          QUITE near the open fields they lived, I've said;
          An humble, boarded cottage o'er their head.
          One charming night--no, I mistake 'tis plain,
          Our hermit, favoured much by wind and rain,
          Pierced in the boarding, where by time 'twas worn;
          A hole through which he introduced a horn;
          And loudly bawled:--attend to what I say,
          Ye women, my commands at once obey.
          This voice spread terror through the little cot;
          Both hid their heads and trembled for their lot;
          But still our monk his horn would sound aloud
          Awake! cried he; your favour God has vowed;
          My faithful servant, Lucius, haste to seek;
          At early dawn go find this hermit meek
          To no one say a word: 'tis Heav'n ordains;
          Fear nothing, Lucius ever blessed remains;
          I'll show the way myself: your daughter place,
          Good widow, with this holy man of grace;
          And from their intercourse a pope shall spring,
          Who back to virtue christendom will bring.

          HE spoke to them so very loud and clear,
          They heard, though 'neath the clothes half dead with fear.
          Some time howe'er the females lay in dread;
          At length the daughter ventured out her head,
          And, pulling hastily her parent's arm,
          Said she, dear mother, (not suspecting harm)
          Good Heav'ns! must I obey and thither go?
          What would the holy man on me bestow?
          I know not what to say nor how to act;
          Now cousin Anne would with him be exact,
          And better recollect his sage advice:--
          Fool! said the mother, never be so nice;
          Go, nothing fear, and do whate'er's desired;
          Much understanding will not be required;
          The first or second time thou'lt get thy cue,
          And cousin Anne will less know what to do.
          Indeed? the girl replied; well, let's away,
          And we'll return to bed without delay.
          But softly, cried the mother with a smile;
          Not quite so fast, for Satan may beguile;
          And if 'twere so, hast taken proper care?
          I think he spoke like one who would ensnare.
          To be precipitate, in such a case,
          Perhaps might lead at once to dire disgrace.
          If thou wert terrified and did'st not hear,
          Myself I'm sure was quite o'ercome with fear.
          No, no, rejoined the daughter, I am right:
          I clearly heard, dear mother, spite of fright.
          Well then, replied the widow, let us pray,
          That we by Satan be not led astray.

          AT length they both arose when morning came,
          And through the day the converse was the same.
          At night howe'er the horn was heard once more,
          And terrified the females as before.
          Thou unbelieving woman, cried the voice,
          For certain purposes of God the choice;
          No more delay, but to the hermit fly,
          Or 'tis decreed that thou shalt quickly die.
          Now, mother, said the girl, I told you well;
          Come, let us hasten to the hermit's cell;
          So much I dread your death, I'll nothing shun;
          And if 'tis requisite, I'll even run.
          Away then, cried the mother, let us go;
          Some pains to dress, the daughter would bestow,
          Without reflecting what might be her fare:--
          To PLEASE is ev'ry blooming lass's care.

          OUR monk was on the watch you may suppose;
          A hole he made that would a glimpse disclose;
          By which, when near his cell the females drew,
          They might, with whip in hand the hermit view,
          Who, like a culprit punished for his crimes,
          Received the lash, and that so many times,
          It sounded like the discipline of schools,
          And made more noise than flogging fifty fools.

          WHEN first our pilgrims knocked, he would not hear;
          And, for the moment, whipping would appear;
          The holy lash severely he applied,
          Which, through the hole, with pain our females spied;
          At length the door he ope'd, but from his eyes
          No satisfaction beamed: he showed surprise.
          With trembling knees and blushes o'er the face,
          The widow now explained the mystick case.
          Six steps behind, the beauteous daughter stood,
          And waited the decree she thought so good.
          The hypocrite howe'er the hermit played,
          And sent these humble pilgrims back dismayed.
          Said he, the evil spirit much I dread;
          No female to my cell should e'er be led;
          Excuse me then: such acts would sorrow bring;
          From me the HOLY FATHER ne'er spring.
          What ne'er from you? the widow straight replied:
          And why should not the blessing, pray, be tried?
          No other answer howsoe'er she got;
          So back they trudged once more to gain their cot.
          Ah! mother, said the girl, 'tis my belief,
          Our many heavy sins have caused thus grief.

          WHEN night arrived and they in sleep were lost,
          Again the hermit's horn the woodwork crossed;
          Return, return, cried he with horrid tone;
          To-morrow you'll have due attention shown;
          I've changed the hermit's cold fastidious mind,
          And when you come, he'll act as I've designed.

          THE couple left their bed at break of day,
          And to the cell repaired without delay
          Our tale to shorten, Lucius kind appeared
          To rigid rules no longer he adhered.
          The mother with him let her girl remain,
          And hastened to her humble roof again.
          The belle complying looked:--he took her arm,
          And soon familiar grew with ev'ry charm.

          O HYPOCRITES! how oft your wily art
          Deceives the world and causes poignant smart.

          AT matins they so very often met,
          Some awkward indications caused regret.
          The fair at length her apron-string perceived
          Grew daily shorter, which her bosom grieved;
          But nothing to the hermit she'd unfold,
          Nor e'en those feelings to her mother told;
          She dreaded lest she should be sent away,
          And be deprived at once of Cupid's play.
          You'll tell me whence so much discernment came?
          From this same play:--the tree of art by name.
          For sev'n long months the nymph her visits paid;
          Her inexperience doubtless wanted aid.

          BUT when the mother saw her daughter's case,
          She made her thank the monk, and leave the place.
          The hermit blessed the Lord for what was done;
          A pleasant course his humble slave had run.
          He told the mother and her daughter fair,
          The child, by God's permission, gifts would share.
          Howe'er, be careful, said the wily wight,
          That with your infant ev'ry thing goes right;
          To you, from thence, great happiness will spring:
          You'll reign the parent of what's more than king;
          Your relatives to noble rank will rise:
          Some will be princes; others lords comprise;
          Your nephews cardinals; your cousins too
          Will dukes become, if they the truth pursue;
          And places, castles, palaces, there'll be,
          For you and them of every high degree;
          You'll nothing want: eternal is the source,
          Like waters flowing in the river's course.
          This long prediction o'er: with features grave,
          His benediction to them both he gave.

          WHEN home returned, the girl, each day and night,
          Amused her mind with prospects of delight;
          By fancy's aid she saw the future pope,
          And all prepared to greet her fondest hope;
          But what arrived the whole at once o'erthrew
          Hats, dukedoms, castles, vanished from the view:
          The promised elevation of the NAME
          Dissolved to air:-a little female came!






               THE CONVENT GARDENER OF LAMPORECHIO


          WHEN Cupid with his dart, would hearts assail,
          The rampart most secure is not the VEIL;
          A husband better will the FAIR protect,
          Than walls or lattices, I much suspect.
          Those parents, who in nunneries have got
          Their daughters (whether willingly or not),
          Most clearly in a glaring error prove,
          To fancy God will round their actions move;
          'Tis an abuse of what we hold divine;
          The Devil with them surely must combine.
          Besides, 'twere folly to suppose that vice
          Ne'er entered convent walls, and nuns were ice.
          A very diff'rent sentiment I hold:
          Girls, who in publick move, however bold,
          Have greater terrors lest they get a stain;
          For, honour lost, they never fame regain.
          Few enemies their modesty attack;
          The others have but one their minds to rack.
          TEMPTATION, daughter of the drowsy dame,
          That hates to move, and IDLENESS we name,
          Is ever practising each wily art,
          To spread her snares around the throbbing heart;
          And fond DESIRE, the child of lorn CONSTRAINT,
          Is anxious to the soul soft scenes to paint.
          If I've a worthy daughter made a nun,
          Is that a reason she's a saint?--Mere fun!
          Avaunt such folly!--three in four you'll find,
          Of those who wear the veil--have changed their mind;
          Their fingers bite, and often do much worse:
          Those convent vows, full soon, become a curse;
          Such things at least have sometimes reached my ear
          (For doubtless I must speak from others here);
          Of his Boccace a merry tale has told,
          Which into rhyme I've put, as you'll behold.

          WITHIN a nunnery, in days of yore,
          A good old man supplied the garden-store;
          The nuns, in general, were smart and gay,
          And kept their tongues in motion through the day.
          Religious duties they regarded less,
          Than for the palour* to be nice in dress
          Arranging ev'ry article to please,
          That each might captivate and charm at ease;
          The changes constantly they rang around,
          And made the convent-walls with din resound.
          Eight sisters and an abbess held the place,
          And strange to say--there DISCORD you might trace.
          All nine had youth, and many beauty too:
          Young friars round the place were oft in view,
          Who reckoned ev'ry step they took so well,
          That always in the proper road they fell.
          Th' aged gard'ner, of whom ere now we spoke,
          Was oft bewildered, they would so provoke;
          Capricious, whimsical, from day to day,
          Each would command and try to have her way;
          And as they ne'er agreed among themselves,
          He suffered more than if with fifty elves;
          When one was pleased, another soon complained:
          At length to quit the nuns he was constrained.
          He left them, poor and wretched as he came;
          No cross, pile, money:--e'en his coat the same.

          A YOUTH of Lamporechio, gay and bold,
          One day this gard'ner met as I am told;
          And after conversation 'bout the place,
          Said, he should like nun's service to embrace,
          And that he wished sincerely to be hired:
          He'd gratis do whatever was required.
          'Twas clear indeed his object was not pelf;
          He thought however he might reward himself;
          And as the sisters were not over wise,
          A nun he now and then might make his prize;
          Proceed from one to more with like address,
          Till with the whole he'd had complete success.
          Said Nuto (such we find the gard'ner's name),
          Believe me, friend, you will be much to blame;
          Some other service seek, I recommend;
          These convent-dames will ne'er their whimseys end.
          I'd rather live without or soup or bread,
          Than work for them, however nicely fed.

          STRANGE creatures are these nuns, upon my word;
          Their ways ridiculous and e'en absurd;
          Who, with the sisterhood, has never been,
          Has clearly yet, not perfect torment seen,
          Such service, prithee, never try to gain;
          To do what they require I know is vain;
          One will have soft, and t'other asks for hard:
          Thou'lt be a fool such ninnies to regard;
          No work thou'lt do, whatever be the want:
          THIS cabbages,--THAT carrots tells thee plant:
          Said t'other, fain I'd bring it to the test;
          I'm but a simpleton, it is confessed;
          Yet still a month in place, and thou wilt see;
          How well I with the convent-dames agree.
          The reason is, my life is in its prime,
          While thou art sunk in years and worn by time,
          I'm proper for their work, and only ask,
          To be admitted to the drudging task.
          Well, said the former, if resolved to try,
          To their factotum instantly apply;
          Come; let's away.   Lead on, the other cried;
          I've got a thought, which I'll to you confide:--
          I'll seem an idiot, and quite dumb appear.--
          In that, said Nuto, only persevere,
          And then perhaps the confessor thou'lt find,
          With their factotum carelessly inclined;
          No fears nor dark suspicions of a mute:
          Thou'lt ev'ry way, my friend, their wishes suit.

          THE place, as was expected, soon he got;
          And half the grounds to trench, at once his lot:
          He acted well the nincompoop and fool,
          Yet still was steady to the garden tool;
          The nuns continually would flock around,
          And much amusement in his anticks found.

          ONE day, as sleeping lay our sprightly wight,
          Or feigning sleep, no matter which is right,
          (Boccace pretends the latter was the fact)
          Two nuns (perhaps not two the most exact,)
          Observing him extended on the sward,
          While summer's heat from air so much debarred;
          That few would venture from the convent-roof,
          Lest, 'gainst the sun, their cheeks should not be proof:
          Said one, approaching him, let's take this fool,
          And place him in the garden-house to cool.
          The lad was handsome, with engaging mien:
          The nun admired the features she had seen,
          And Cupid raised a wish to be at ease,
          Where she, without restraint, herself might please.
          What would you, cried the other, with him do?
          You'll see, rejoined the first, if we pursue;
          Just what might be expected from the place;
          Christ! said the second (with a cross of grace),
          You would not surely do what is forbid?
          Suppose increase? it never could be hid;
          Besides, should we be seen, 'twill be the cause,
          Of dire disgrace to break such sacred laws.

          WE shall not be observed, the first replied;
          These ills thy fancy forms: haste, let's decide,
          And seize the moment while 'tis in our reach,
          Without regard to what old dotards teach,
          Or what may happen at a future hour;
          Here's no one near: 'tis fully in our pow'r;
          The time and place so thoroughly agree,
          'Twill be impossible our freaks to see;
          But 'twill be right that one should watch with care;
          While t'other with the lad seeks joys to share,
          And irksome gloom endeavours to dispel:
          He's dumb, you know, and tales can never tell.
          The other answered, since 'tis your desire,
          I'll acquiesce and do what you require;
          You'll take him first: I see it is your aim;
          And since it will oblige, I'll wave my claim;
          Go, pleasure seek, and satisfy each wish:
          You're always anxious for a fav'rite dish;
          'Tis only to oblige that I comply.
          That, said the other, clearly I descry;
          I'm well persuaded, thou art always kind;
          But still I think thou would'st not be inclined;
          In such a scene to take the leading part,
          Thy bashfulness would counteract thy heart.

          Some time the squeamish sister watched the spot;
          At length the other, who'd her wishes got,
          The station took; the lab'rer tried to please
          The second as the first, but less at ease;
          So many favours fell not to her share,
          And only treble comfort proved her fare.

          THE garden-path, and summer-house as well,
          Were well remembered by each wanton belle;
          No need of guides; and soon our spark contrived;
          With sister Agnes also to be hived
          A press-house at the convent end he chose,
          in which he showed her how soft pleasure flows;
          Nor Claudia nor Angelica would miss
          The dormitory that, and cellar this;
          In short the garret and the vaulted cave
          Knew fully how the sisters could behave;
          Not one but what he first or last regaled
          E'en with the rigid abbess he prevailed,
          To take a dance, and as the dame required
          Her treble share of what was most admired,
          The other nuns were oft obliged to fast,
          While with the convent-head his time was passed.

          To no restoratives our Wight would run;
          Though these do little, where much work is done:
          So oft the lad was pressed for cheering play,
          That with the abbess, when engaged one day,
          He said, where'er I go, 'tis common talk,
          With only sev'n an able bird should walk,
          Yet constantly I've got no less than nine:--
          The abbess cried,--A miracle divine!
          Here nuns, pray haste, and quickly come around;
          We've fasted with success:--his tongue is found.
          The eight encircled him with great surprise;
          No longer dumb.--they viewed with eager eyes:
          A consultation instantly was had,
          When 'twas agreed to honour well the lad,
          And try to make him secrecy observe;
          But if dismissed, from silence he might swerve.
          The active youth, well fed, well paid, thus blessed,
          Did all he could,--and others did the rest.
          He for the nuns procured a little lot,
          That afterward two little friars got,
          And in the sequel fathers soon became;
          The sisters mothers too, in spite of shame;
          But never name more justly was applied:
          In vain their mysteries they strove to hide.

     * The parlour in a convent is the room where the nuns are
     permitted to speak to their friends through a lattice.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

A pretty wife? Beware the monks as you would guard your life
Monks are knaves in Virtue's mask







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 14 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


