The Project Gutenberg eBook of Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 07
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 07

Author: Jean de La Fontaine


        
Release date: March 1, 2004 [eBook #5281]
                Most recently updated: December 28, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/5281

Credits: This eBook was produced by David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 07 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





                       THE TALES AND NOVELS
                                OF
                        J. DE LA FONTAINE


          Volume 7.


          Contains:
            The Falcon
            The Little Dog



                         THE FALCON

          I RECOLLECT, that lately much I blamed,
          The sort of lover, avaricious named;
          And if in opposites we reason see,
          The liberal in paradise should be.
          The rule is just and, with the warmest zeal,
          To prove the fact I to the CHURCH appeal.

          IN Florence once there dwelled a gentle youth,
          Who loved a certain beauteous belle with truth;
          O'er all his actions she had full controul;--
          To please he would have sold his very soul.
          If she amusements wished, he'd lavish gold,
          Convinced in love or war you should be bold;
          The cash ne'er spare:--invincible its pow'rs,
          O'erturning walls or doors where'er it show'rs.
          The precious ore can every thing o'ercome;
          'Twill silence barking curs: make servants dumb;
          And these can render eloquent at will:--
          Excel e'en Tully in persuasive skill;
          In short he'd leave no quarter unsubdued,
          Unless therein the fair he could include.

          SHE stood th' attack howe'er, and Frederick failed;
          His force was vain whenever he assailed;
          Without the least return his wealth he spent:
          Lands, houses, manors of immense extent,
          Were ev'ry now and then to auction brought;
          To gratify his love was all he thought.

          THE rank of 'squire till lately he had claimed;
          Now scarcely was he even mister named;
          Of wealth by Cupid's stratagems bereft,
          A single farm was all the man had left;
          Friends very few, and such as God alone,
          Could tell if friendship they might not disown;
          The best were led their pity to express;
          'Twas all he got: it could not well be less;
          To lend without security was wrong,
          And former favours they'd forgotten long;
          With all that Frederick could or say or do,
          His liberal conduct soon was lost to view.

          WITH Clytia he no longer was received,
          Than while he was a man of wealth believed;
          Balls, concerts, op'ras, tournaments, and plays,
          Expensive dresses, all engaging ways,
          Were used to captivate this lady fair,
          While scarcely one around but in despair,
          Wife, widow, maid, his fond affection sought;
          To gain him, ev'ry wily art was brought;
          But all in vain:--by passion overpow'red,
          The belle, whose conduct others would have soured,
          To him appeared a goddess full of charms,
          Superior e'en to Helen, in his arms;
          From whence we may conclude, the beauteous dame
          Was always deaf to Fred'rick's ardent flame.

          ENAMOURED of the belle, his lands he sold;
          The family estates were turned to gold;
          And many who the purchases had made,
          With pelf accumulated by their trade,
          Assumed the airs of men of noble birth:--
          Fair subjects oft for ridicule and mirth!

          RICH Clytia was, and her good spouse, 'tis said,
          Had lands which far and wide around were spread;
          No cash nor presents she would ever take,
          Yet suffered Frederick splendid treats to make,
          Without designing recompense to grant,
          Or being more than merely complaisant.

          ALREADY, if my mem'ry do not fail,
          I've said, the youth's estates were put to sale,
          To pay for feasts the fair to entertain,
          And what he'd left was only one domain,
          A petty farm to which he now retired;
          Ashamed to show where once so much admired,
          And wretched too, a prey to lorn despair,
          Unable to obtain by splendid care,
          A beauty he'd pursued six years and more,
          And should for ever fervently adore.
          His want of merit was the cause he thought,
          That she could never to his wish be brought,
          While from him not a syllable was heard,
          Against the lovely belle his soul preferred.

          'MID poverty oft Fred'rick sighed and wept;
          A toothless hag--his only servant kept;
          His kitchen cold; (where commonly he dwelled;)
          A pretty decent horse his stable held;
          A falcon too; and round about the grange,
          Our quondam 'squire repeatedly would range,
          Where oft, to melancholy, he was led,
          To sacrifice the game which near him fed;
          By Clytia's cruelty the gun was seized,
          And feathered victims black chagrin appeased.

          'TWAS thus the lover whiled his hours away;
          His heart-felt torments nothing could allay;
          Blessed if with fortune love he'd also lost,
          Which constantly his earthly comforts crossed;
          But this lorn passion preyed upon his mind:--
          Where'er he rode, BLACK CARE would mount behind.

          DEATH took at length the husband of the fair;
          An only son appointed was his heir,
          A sickly child, whose life, 'twas pretty plain,
          Could scarcely last till spring returned again,
          Which made the husband, by his will, decree,
          His wife the infant's successor should be,
          In case the babe at early years should die,
          Who soon grew worse and raised the widow's sigh.

          TOO much affection parents ne'er can show:--
          A mother's feelings none but mothers know.

          FAIR Clytia round her child with anxious care,
          Watched day and night, and no expense would spare;
          Inquired if this or that would please his taste;
          What he desired should be procured with haste;
          But nothing would he have that she proposed;
          An ardent wish howe'er the boy disclosed,
          For Fred'rick's Falcon, and most anxious grew:--
          Tear followed tear, and nothing else would do.
          When once a child has got a whim in brain,
          No peace, no rest, till he the boon obtain.

          WE should observe our belle, near Fred'rick's cot,
          A handsome house and many lands had got;
          'Twas there the lovely babe had lately heard,
          Most wondrous stories of the bird averred;
          No partridge e'er escaped its rapid wing:--
          On every morn down numbers it would bring;
          No money for it would its owner take;
          Much grieved was Clytia such request to make.
          The man, for her, of wealth had been bereft;
          How ask the only treasure he had left?
          And him if she were led to importune,
          Could she expect that he'd accord the boon?
          Alas! ungratefully she oft repaid,
          His liberal treats, his concerts, serenade,
          And haughtily behaved from first to last:
          How be so bold, (reflecting on the past,)
          To see the man that she so ill had used?
          And ask a favour?--could she be excused?
          But then her child!--perhaps his life 'twould save;
          Naught would he take; the falcon she must crave.

          THAT her sweet babe might be induced to eat,
          So meant the bird of Fred'rick to intreat;
          Her boy was heard continually to cry,
          Unless he had the falcon, he should die.

          THESE reasons strongly with the mother weighed;
          Her visit to the 'squire was not delayed;
          With fond affection for her darling heir,
          One morn, alone she sought the lorn repair.

          TO Fred'rick's eye an angel she appeared;
          But shame he felt, that she, his soul revered,
          Should find him poor:--no servants to attend,
          Nor means to give a dinner to a friend.
          The poverty in which he now was viewed,
          Distressed his mind and all his griefs renewed.
          Why come? said he; what led you thus to trace,
          An humble slave of your celestial face?
          A villager, a wretched being here;
          Too great the honour doubtless must appear;
          'Twas somewhere else you surely meant to go?
          The lady in a moment answered no.
          Cried he, I've neither cook nor kettle left;
          Then how can I receive you, thus bereft?
          But you have bread, said Clytia:--that will do;--
          The lover quickly to the poultry flew,
          In search of eggs; some bacon too he found;
          But nothing else, except the hawk renowned,
          Which caught his eye, and instantly was seized,
          Slain, plucked, and made a fricassee that pleased.

          MEANWHILE the house-keeper for linen sought;
          Knives, forks, plates, spoons, cups, glass and chairs she
          brought;
          The fricassee was served, the dame partook,
          And on the dish with pleasure seemed to look.

          THE dinner o'er, the widow then resolved,
          To ask the boon which in her mind resolved.
          She thus begun:--good sir, you'll think me mad,
          To come and to your breast fresh trouble add;
          I've much to ask, and you will feel surprise,
          That one, for whom your love could ne'er suffice,
          Should now request your celebrated bird;
          Can I expect the grant?--the thought 's absurd
          But pardon pray a mother's anxious fear;
          'Tis for my child:--his life to me is dear.
          The falcon solely can the infant save;
          Yet since to you I nothing ever gave,
          For all your kindness oft on me bestowed;
          Your fortune wasted:--e'en your nice abode,
          Alas! disposed of, large supplies to raise,
          To entertain and please in various ways:
          I cannot hope this falcon to obtain;
          For sure I am the expectation's vane;
          No, rather perish child and mother too;
          Than such uneasiness should you pursue:
          Allow howe'er this parent, I beseech,
          Who loves her offspring 'yond the pow'r of speech,
          Or language to express, her only boy,
          Sole hope, sole comfort, all her earthly joy,
          True mother like, to seek her child's relief,
          And in your breast deposit now her grief.
          Affection's pow'r none better know than you,--
          How few to love were ever half so true!
          From such a bosom I may pardon crave
          Soft pity's ever with the good and brave!

          ALAS! the wretched lover straight replied,
          The bird was all I could for you provide;
          'Twas served for dinner.--Dead?--exclaimed the dame,
          While trembling terror overspread her frame.
          No jest, said he, and from the soul I wish,
          My heart, instead of that, had been the dish;
          But doomed alas! am I by fate, 'tis clear,
          To find no grace with her my soul holds dear:
          I'd nothing left; and when I saw the bird,
          To kill it instantly the thought occurred;
          Those naught we grudge nor spare to entertain,
          Who o'er our feeling bosoms sov'reign reign:
          All I can do is speedily to get,
          Another falcon: easily they're met;
          And by to-morrow I'll the bird procure.
          No, Fred'rick, she replied, I now conjure
          You'll think no more about it; what you've done
          Is all that fondness could have shown a son;
          And whether fate has doomed the child to die,
          Or with my prayers the pow'rs above comply;
          For you my gratitude will never end--
          Pray let us hope to see you as a friend.

          THEN Clytia took her leave, and gave her hand;
          A proof his love no more she would withstand.
          He kissed and bathed her fingers with his tears;
          The second day grim death confirmed their fears:

          THE mourning lasted long and mother's grief;
          But days and months at length bestowed relief;
          No wretchedness so great, we may depend,
          But what, to time's all-conqu'ring sithe will bend:

          TWO famed physicians managed with such care;
          That they recovered her from wild despair,
          And tears gave place to cheerfulness and joy:-
          The one was TIME the other Venus' Boy.
          Her hand fair Clytia on the youth bestowed,
          As much from love as what to him she owed.

          LET not this instance howsoe'r mislead;
          'Twere wrong with hope our fond desires to feed,
          And waste our substance thus:--not all the FAIR,
          Possess of gratitude a decent share.
          With this exception they appear divine;
          In lovely WOMAN angel-charms combine;
          The whole indeed I do not here include;
          Alas; too many act the jilt and prude.
          When kind, they're ev'ry blessing found below:
          When otherwise a curse we often know.






                        THE LITTLE DOG


          THE key, which opes the chest of hoarded gold.
          Unlocks the heart that favours would withhold.
          To this the god of love has oft recourse,
          When arrows fail to reach the secret source,
          And I'll maintain he's right, for, 'mong mankind,
          Nice presents ev'ry where we pleasing find;
          Kings, princes, potentates, receive the same,
          And when a lady thinks she's not to blame,
          To do what custom tolerates around;
          When Venus' acts are only Themis' found,
          I'll nothing 'gainst her say; more faults than one,
          Besides the present, have their course begun.

          A MANTUAN judge espoused a beauteous fair:
          Her name was Argia:--Anselm was her care,
          An aged dotard, trembling with alarms,
          While she was young, and blessed with seraph charms.
          But, not content with such a pleasing prize,
          His jealousy appeared without disguise,
          Which greater admiration round her drew,
          Who doubtless merited, in ev'ry view,
          Attention from the first in rank or place
          So elegant her form, so fine her face.

          'TWOULD endless prove, and nothing would avail,
          Each lover's pain minutely to detail:
          Their arts and wiles; enough 'twill be no doubt,
          To say the lady's heart was found so stout,
          She let them sigh their precious hours away,
          And scarcely seemed emotion to betray.

          WHILE at the judge's, Cupid was employed,
          Some weighty things the Mantuan state annoyed,
          Of such importance, that the rulers meant,
          An embassy should to the Pope be sent.
          As Anselm was a judge of high degree,
          No one so well embassador could be.

          'TWAS with reluctance he agreed to go,
          And be at Rome their mighty Plenipo';
          The business would be long, and he must dwell
          Six months or more abroad, he could not tell.
          Though great the honour, he should leave his dove,
          Which would be painful to connubial love.
          Long embassies and journeys far from home
          Oft cuckoldom around induce to roam.

          THE husband, full of fears about his wife;
          Exclaimed--my ever--darling, precious life,
          I must away; adieu, be faithful pray,
          To one whose heart from you can never stray
          But swear to me, my duck, (for, truth to tell,
          I've reason to be jealous of my belle,)
          Now swear these sparks, whose ardour I perceive,
          Have sighed without success, and I'll believe.
          But still your honour better to secure,
          From slander's tongue, and virtue to ensure,
          I'd have you to our country-house repair;
          The city quit:--these sly gallants beware;
          Their presents too, accurst invention found,
          With danger fraught, and ever much renowned;
          For always in the world, where lovers move,
          These gifts the parent of assentment prove.
          'Gainst those declare at once; nor lend an ear
          To flattery, their cunning sister-peer.
          If they approach, shut straight both ears and eyes;
          For nothing you shall want that wealth supplies;
          My store you may command; the key behold,
          Where I've deposited my notes and gold.
          Receive my rents; expend whate'er you please;
          I'll look for no accounts; live quite at ease;
          I shall be satisfied with what you do,
          If naught therein to raise a blush I view;
          You've full permission to amuse your mind;
          Your love, howe'er, for me alone's designed;
          That, recollect, must be for my return,
          For which our bosoms will with ardour burn.

          THE good man's bounty seemingly was sweet;
          All pleasures, one excepted, she might greet;
          But that, alas! by bosoms unpossessed,
          No happiness arises from the rest:
          His lady promised ev'ry thing required:--
          Deaf, blind, and cruel,--whosoe'er admired;
          And not a present would her hand receive
          At his return, he fully might believe,
          She would be found the same as when he went,
          Without gallant, or aught to discontent.

          HER husband gone, she presently retired
          Where Anselm had so earnestly desired;
          The lovers came, but they were soon dismissed,
          And told, from visits they must all desist;
          Their assiduities were irksome grown,
          And she was weary of their lovesick tone.
          Save one, they all were odious to the fair;
          A handsome youth, with smart engaging air;
          But whose attentions to the belle were vain;
          In spite of arts, his aim he could not gain;
          His name was Atis, known to love and arms,
          Who grudged no pains, could he possess her charms.
          Each wile he tried, and if he'd kept to sighs,
          No doubt the source is one that never dries;
          But often diff'rent with expense 'tis found;
          His wealth was wasted rapidly around
          He wretched grew; at length for debt he fled,
          And sought a desert to conceal his head.
          As on the road he moved, a clown he met,
          Who with his stick an adder tried to get,
          From out a thicket, where it hissing lay,
          And hoped to drive the countryman away:
          Our knight his object asked; the clown replied,
          To slay the reptile anxiously I tried;
          Wherever met, an adder I would kill:
          The race should be extinct if I'd my will.

          WHY would'st thou, friend, said Atis, these destroy?
          God meant that all should freely life enjoy.
          The youthful knight for reptiles had, we find,
          Less dread than what prevails with human kind;
          He bore them in his arms:--they marked his birth;
          From noble Cadmus sprung, who, when on earth,
          At last, to serpent was in age transformed;
          The adder's bush the clown no longer stormed;
          No more the spotted reptile sought to stay,
          But seized the time, and quickly crept away.

          AT length our lover to a wood retired;
          To live concealed was what the youth desired;
          Lorn silence reigned, except from birds that sang,
          And dells that oft with sweetest echo rang.
          There HAPPINESS and frightful MIS'RY lay,
          Quite undistinguished: classed with beasts of prey;
          That growling prowled in search of food around:
          There Atis consolation never found.
          LOVE thither followed, and, however viewed,
          'Twas vain to hope his passion to elude;
          Retirement fed the tender, ardent flame,
          And irksome ev'ry minute soon became.
          Let us return, cried he, since such our fate:
          'Tis better, Atis, bear her frowns and hate,
          Than of her beauteous features lose the view;
          Ye nightingales and streams, ye woods adieu!
          When far from her I neither see nor hear:
          'Tis she alone my senses still revere;
          A slave I am, who fled her dire disdain;
          Yet seek once more to wear the cruel chain.

          AS near some noble walls our knight arrived,
          Which fairy-hands to raise had once contrived,
          His eyes beheld, at peep of early morn,
          When bright Aurora's beams the earth adorn,
          A beauteous nymph in royal robes attired,
          Of noble mien, and formed to be admired,
          Who t'ward him drew, with pleasing, gracious air,
          While he was wrapped in thought, a prey to care.

          SAID she, I'd have you, Atis, happy be;
          'Tis in my pow'r, and this I hope to see;
          A fairy greet me, Manto is my name:--
          Your friend, and one you've served unknown:--the same
          My fame you've heard, no doubt; from me proceeds
          The Mantuan town, renowned for ancient deeds;
          In days of yore I these foundations laid,
          Which in duration, equal I have made,
          To those of Memphis, where the Nile's proud course
          Majestically flows from hidden source.
          The cruel Parcae are to us unknown;
          We wond'rous magick pow'rs have often shown;
          But wretched, spite of this, appears our lot
          Death never comes, though various ills we've got,
          For we to human maladies are prone,
          And suffer greatly oft, I freely own.

          ONCE, in each week to serpents we are changed;
          Do you remember how you here arranged,
          To save an adder from a clown's attack?
          'Twas I, the furious rustick wished to hack,
          When you assisted me to get away;
          For recompense, my friend, without delay,
          I'll you procure the kindness of the fair,
          Who makes you love and drives you to despair:
          We'll go and see her:--be assured from me,
          Before two days are passed, as I foresee,
          You'll gain, by presents, Argia and the rest,
          Who round her watch, and are the suitor's pest.
          Grudge no expense, be gen'rous, and be bold,
          Your handfuls scatter, lavish be of gold.
          Assured you shall not want the precious ore;
          For I command the whole of Plutus' store,
          Preserved, to please me, in the shades below;
          This charmer soon our magick pow'r shall know.

          THE better to approach the cruel belle,
          And to your suit her prompt consent compel,
          Myself transformed you'll presently perceive;
          And, as a little dog, I'll much achieve,
          Around and round I'll gambol o'er the lawn,
          And ev'ry way attempt to please and fawn,
          While you, a pilgrim, shall the bag-pipe play;
          Come, bring me to the dame without delay.

          NO sooner said, the lover quickly changed,
          Together with the fairy, as arranged;
          A pilgrim he, like Orpheus, piped and sang;
          While Manto, as a dog, skipt, jumped, and sprang.

          THEY thus proceeded to the beauteous dame;
          Soon valets, maids, and others round them came;
          The dog and pilgrim gave extreme delight
          And all were quite diverted at the sight.

          THE lady heard the noise, and sent her maid,
          To learn the reason why they romped and played:
          She soon returned and told the lovely belle,
          A spaniel danced, and even spoke so well,
          it ev'ry thing could fully understand,
          And showed obedience to the least command.
          'Twere better come herself and take a view:
          The things were wond'rous that the dog could do.

          THE dame at any price the dog would buy,
          In case the master should the boon deny.
          To give the dog our pilgrim was desired;
          But though he would not grant the thing required;
          He whispered to the maid the price he'd take,
          And some proposals was induced to make.
          Said he, 'tis true, the creature 's not for sale;
          Nor would I give it: prayers will ne'er prevail;
          Whate'er I chance to want from day to day,
          It furnishes without the least delay.
          To have my wish, three words alone I use,
          Its paw I squeeze, and whatsoe'er I choose,
          Of gold, or jewels, fall upon the ground;
          Search all the world, there's nothing like it found.
          Your lady's rich, and money does not want;
          Howe'er, my little dog to her I'll grant
          If she'll a night permit me in her bed,
          The treasure shall at once to her be led.

          THE maid at this proposal felt surprise;
          Her mistress truly! less might well suffice;
          A paltry knave! cried she, it makes me laugh;
          What! take within her bed a pilgrim's staff!
          Were such a circumstance abroad to get,
          My lady would with ridicule be met;
          The dog and master, probably, were last
          Beneath a hedge, or on a dunghill cast;
          A house like this they'll never see agen;--
          But then the master is the pride of men,
          And that in love is ev'ry thing we find
          Much wealth and beauty please all womankind!

          HIS features and his mien the knight had changed;
          Each air and look for conquest were arranged.
          The maid exclaimed: when such a lover sues,
          How can a woman any thing refuse?
          Besides the pilgrim has a dog, 'tis plain,
          Not all the wealth of China could obtain.
          Yet to possess my lady for a night,
          Would to the master be supreme delight:

          I SHOULD have mentioned, that our cunning spark;
          The dog would whisper (feigning some remark,)
          On which ten ducats tumbled at his feet;
          These Atis gave the maid, (O deed discreet;)
          Then fell a diamond: this our wily wight
          Took up, and smiling at the precious sight,
          Said he, what now I hold I beg you'll bear,
          To her you serve, so worthy of your care;
          Present my compliments, and to her say,
          I'm her devoted servant from to-day.

          THU female quickly to her mistress went;
          Our charming little dog to represent:
          The various pow'rs displayed, and wonders done;
          Yet scarcely had she on the knight begun,
          And mentioned what he wished her to unfold,
          But Argia could her rage no longer hold;
          A fellow! to presume, cried she, to speak
          Of me with freedom!--I am not so weak,
          To listen to such infamy, not I
          A pilgrim too!--no, you may well rely,
          E'en were he Atis, it would be the same,
          To whom I now my cruel conduct blame:
          Such things he never would to me propose;
          Not e'en a monarch would the like disclose;
          I'm 'bove temptation, presents would not do:--
          Not Plutus' stores, if offered to my view;
          A paltry pilgrim to presume indeed,
          To think that I would such a blackguard heed,
          Ambassadress my rank! and to admit
          A fellow, only for the gallows fit!

          THIS pilgrim, cried the maid, has got the means
          Not only belles to get, but even queens;
          Or beauteous goddesses he could obtain:--
          He's worth a thousand Atis's 'tis plain.
          Bur, said the wife, my husband made me vow.
          What? cried the maid, you'd not bedeck his brow!
          A pretty promise truly:--can you think,
          You less from this, than from the first, should shrink?
          Who'll know the fact, or publish it around?
          Consider well, how many might be found,
          Who, were they marked with spot upon the nose,
          When things had taken place that we suppose,
          Would not their heads so very lofty place,
          I'm well assured, but feel their own disgrace.
          For such a thing, are we the worse a hair?
          No, no, good lady, who presumes to swear,
          He can discern the lips which have been pressed,
          By those that never have the fact confessed,
          Must be possessed of penetrating eyes,
          Which pierce the sable veil of dark disguise.
          This favour, whether you accord or not,
          'Twill not a whit be less nor more a blot.
          For whom, I pray, LOVE'S treasures would you hoard?
          For one, who never will a treat afford,
          Or what is much the same, has not the pow'r?
          All he may want you'll give him in an hour,
          At his return; he's very weak and old,
          And, doubtless, ev'ry way is icy cold!

          THE cunning girl such rhetorick displayed,
          That all she said, her mistress, having weighed,
          Began to doubt alone, and not deny
          The spaniel's art, and pilgrim's piercing eye:
          To her the master and his dog were led,
          To satisfy her mind while still in bed;
          For bright Aurora, from the wat'ry deep,
          Not more reluctantly arose from sleep.

          OUR spark approached the dame with easy air,
          Which seemed the man of fashion to declare;
          His compliments were made with ev'ry grace,
          That minds most difficult could wish to trace.

          THE fair was charmed, and with him quite content;
          You do not look, said she, like one who meant
          Saint James of Compostella soon to see,
          Though, doubtless, oft to saints you bend the knee.

          TO entertain the smiling beauteous dame,
          The dog, by various tricks, confirmed his flame,
          To please the maid and mistress he'd in view:
          Too much for these of course he could not do;
          Though, for the husband, he would never move,
          The little fav'rite sought again to prove
          His wond'rous worth, and scattered o'er the ground,
          With sudden shake, among the servants round,
          Nice pearls, which they on strings arranged with care;
          And these the pilgrim offered to the fair:
          Gallantly fastened them around her arms,
          Admired their whiteness and extolled her charms:
          So well he managed, 'twas at length agreed,
          In what his heart desired he should succeed;
          The dog was bought: the belle bestowed a kiss,
          As earnest of the promised future bliss.

          THE night arrived, when Atis fondly pressed,
          Within his arms, the lady thus caressed;
          Himself he suddenly became again,
          On which she scarcely could her joy contain:--
          Th' ambassador she more respect should show,
          Than favours on a pilgrim to bestow.

          THE fair and spark so much admired the night;
          That others followed equal in delight;
          Each felt the same, for where's the perfect shade;
          That can conceal when joys like these pervade?
          Expression strongly marks the youthful face,
          And all that are not blind the truth can trace.
          Some months had passed, when Anselm was dismissed;
          Of gifts and pardons, long appeared his list;
          A load of honours from the Pope he got:--
          The CHURCH will these most lib'rally allot.

          FROM his vicegerent quickly he received
          A good account, and friends his fears relieved;
          The servants never dropt a single word
          Of what had passed, but all to please concurred.

          THE judge, both maid and servants, questioned much;
          But not a hint he got, their care was such.
          Yet, as it often happens 'mong the FAIR,
          The devil entered on a sudden there;
          Such quarrels 'tween the maid and mistress rose,
          The former vowed she would the tale disclose.
          Revenge induced her ev'ry thing to tell,
          Though she were implicated with the belle.

          SO great the husband's rage, no words can speak:
          His fury somewhere he of course would wreak;
          But, since to paint it clearly would be vain--
          You'll by the sequel judge his poignant pain.

          A SERVANT Anselm ordered to convey
          His wife a note, who was, without delay,
          To come to town her honoured spouse to see;
          Extremely ill (for such he feigned to be.)
          As yet the lady in the country stayed;
          Her husband to and fro' his visits paid.

          SAID he, remember, when upon the road,
          Conducting Argia from her lone abode,
          You must contrive her men to get away,
          And with her none but you presume to stay.--
          A jade! she horns has planted on my brow:
          Her death shall be the consequence I vow.

          WITH force a poinard in her bosom thrust;
          Watch well th' occasion:--die, I say, she must,
          The deed performed, escape; here's for you aid;
          The money take:--pursuit you can evade;
          As I request, proceed; then trust to me:--
          You naught shall want wherever you may be.

          TO seek fair Argia instantly he went;
          She, by her dog, was warned of his intent.
          How these can warn? if asked, I shall reply,
          They grumble, bark, complain, or fawn, or sigh;
          Pull petticoat or gown, and snarl at all,
          Who happen in their way just then to fall;
          But few so dull as not to comprehend;
          Howe'er, this fav'rite whispered to his friend,
          The dangers that awaited her around;
          But go, said he, protection you have found;
          Confide in me:--I'll ev'ry ill prevent,
          For which the rascal hither has been sent.
          As on they moved, a wood was in the way,
          Where robbers often waited for their prey;
          The villain whom the husband had employed,
          Sent forward those whose company annoyed,
          And would prevent his execrable plan;
          The last of horrid crimes.--disgrace to man!
          No sooner had the wretch his orders told,
          But Argia vanished--none could her behold;
          The beauteous belle was quickly lost to view:
          A cloud, the fairy Manto o'er her threw.

          THIS circumstance astonished much the wretch,
          Who ran to give our doating spouse a sketch
          Of what had passed so strange upon the way;
          Old Anselm thither went without delay,
          When, marvellous to think! with great surprise,
          He saw a palace of extensive size,
          Erected where, an hour or two before,
          A hovel was not seen, nor e'en a door.

          THE husband stood aghast!--admired the place,
          Not built for man, e'en gods 'twould not disgrace.
          The rooms were gilt; the decorations fine;
          The gardens and the pleasure-grounds divine;
          Such rich magnificence was never seen;
          Superb the whole, a charming blessed demesne.
          The entrance ev'ry way was open found;
          But not a person could be viewed around,
          Except a negro, hideous to behold,
          Who much resembled AEsop, famed of old.

          OUR judge the negro for a porter took,
          Who was the house to clean and overlook;
          And taking him for such, the black addressed,
          With full belief the title was the best,
          And that he greatly honoured him, 'twas plain
          (Of ev'ry colour men are proud and vain:)
          Said he, my friend, what god this palace owns?
          Too much it seems for those of earthly thrones;
          No king, of consequence enough could be;
          The palace, cried the black, belongs to me.

          THE judge was instantly upon his knees,
          The negro's pardon asked, and sought to please;
          I trust, said he, my lord, you'll overlook
          The fault I made: my ignorance mistook.
          The universe has not so nice a spot;
          The world so beautiful a palace got!

          DOST wish me, said the black, the house to give,
          For thee and thine therein at ease to live?
          On one condition thou shalt have the place
          For thee I seriously intend the grace,
          If thou 'lt on me a day or two attend,
          As page of honour:--dost thou comprehend?
          The custom know'st thou--better I'll expound;
          A cup-bearer with Jupiter is found,
          Thou'st heard no doubt.

                            ANSELM

          What, Ganymede?

                            NEGRO

                                            The same;
          And I'm that Jupiter of mighty fame;
          The chief supreme who rules above the skies;
          Be thou the lad with fascinating eyes,
          Though not so handsome, nor in truth so young.

                            ANSELM

          You jest, my lord; to youth I don't belong;
          'Tis very clear;--my judge's dress--my age!

                            NEGRO

          I jest? thou dream'st.

                            ANSELM

          My lord?

                           NEGRO

                                           You won't engage?
          Just as you will:--'tis all the same you'll find.

                           ANSELM

          My lord!. . . . The learned judge himself resigned,
          The black's mysterious wishes to obey;--
          Alas! curst presents, how they always weigh!

          A PAGE the magistrate was quickly seen,
          In dress, in look, in age, in air, in mien;
          His hat became a cap; his beard alone
          Remained unchanged; the rest had wholly flown.

          THUS metamorphosed to a pretty boy,
          The judge proceeded in the black's employ.
          Within a corner hidden, Argia lay,
          And heard what Anselm had been led to say.
          The Moor howe'er was Manto, most renowned,
          Transformed, as oft the fairy we have found;
          She built the charming palace by her art,--
          Now youthful features would to age impart.

          AT length, as Anselm through a passage came,
          He suddenly beheld his beauteous dame.
          What! learned Anselm do I see, said she,
          In this disguise?--It surely cannot be;
          My eyes deceive me:--Anselm, grave and wise;
          Give such a lesson? I am all surprise.

          'TIS doubtless he: oh, oh! our bald-pate sire;
          Ambassador and judge, we must admire,
          To see your honour thus in masquerade:--
          At your age, truly, suffer to be made
          A--modesty denies my tongue its powr's
          What!--you condemn to death for freaks like ours?
          You, whom I've found *** you understand--for shame
          Your crimes are such as all must blush to name.
          Though I may have a negro for gallant,
          And erred when Atis for me seemed to pant,
          His merit and the black's superior rank,
          Must lessen, if not quite excuse my prank.
          Howe'er, old boy, you presently shall see,
          If any belle solicited should be,
          To grant indulgencies, with presents sweet,
          She will not straight capitulation beat;
          At least, if they be such as I have viewed:--
          Moor, change to dog; immediately ensued
          The metamorphose that the fair required,
          The black'moor was again a dog admired.
          Dance, fav'rite; instantly he skipped and played;
          And to the judge his pretty paw conveyed.
          Spaniel, scatter gold; presently there fell
          Large sums of money, as the sound could tell.
          Such strong temptation who can e'er evade?
          The dog a present to your wife was made.
          Then show me, if you can, upon the earth,
          A queen, a princess, of the highest birth,
          Who would not virtue presently concede,
          If such excuses for it she could plead;
          Particularly if the giver proved
          A handsome lad that elegantly moved.

          I, TRULY, for the spaniel was exchanged;
          What you'd too much of, freely I arranged,
          To grant away, this jewel to obtain
          My value 's nothing great, you think, 'tis plain;
          And, surely, you'd have thought me very wrong,
          When such a prize I met, to haggle long.
          'Twas he this palace raised; but I have done;
          Remember, since you've yet a course to run,
          Take care again how you command my death;
          In spite of your designs I draw my breath.
          Though none but Atis with me had success,
          I now desire, he may Lucretia bless,
          And wish her to surrender up her charms,
          (Just like myself) to his extended arms.
          If you approve, our peace at once is made:
          If not--while I've this dog I'm not afraid,
          But you defy: I dread not swords nor bowl;
          The little dog can warn me of the whole;
          The jealous he confounds; be that no more;
          Such folly hence determine to give o'er.
          If you, to put restraints on women choose,
          You'll sooner far their fond affections lose.

          THE whole our judge conceded;--could he less?
          The secret of his recent change of dress
          Was promised to be kept: and that unknown,
          E'en cuckoldom again might there have flown.

          OUR couple mutual compensation made,
          Then bade adieu to hill, and dale, and glade.

          SOME critick asks the handsome palace' fate;
          I answer:--that, my friend, I shan't relate;
          It disappeared, no matter how nor when.
          Why put such questions?--strict is not my pen.
          The little dog, pray what of that became?
          To serve the lover was his constant aim.

          AND how was that?--You're troublesome my friend:
          The dog perhaps would more assistance lend;
          On new intrigues his master might be bent;
          With single conquest who was e'er content?

          THE fav'rite spaniel oft was missing found;
          But when the little rogue had gone his round,
          He'd then return, as if from work relieved,
          To her who first his services received.
          His fondness into fervent friendship grew;
          As such gay Atis visited anew;
          He often came, but Argia was sincere,
          And firmly to her vow would now adhere:
          Old Anselm too, had sworn, by heav'n above;
          No more to be suspicious of his love;
          And, if he ever page became again,
          To suffer punishment's severest pain.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Twere wrong with hope our fond desires to feed







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 07 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


