The Project Gutenberg eBook of Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 12
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Tales and Novels of J. de La Fontaine — Volume 12

Author: Jean de La Fontaine


        
Release date: March 1, 2004 [eBook #5286]
                Most recently updated: December 28, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/5286

Credits: This eBook was produced by David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 12 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger





                     THE TALES AND NOVELS
                              OF
                      J. DE LA FONTAINE



          Volume 12.

          Contains:
            The Monks of Catalonia
            The Cradle



                    THE MONKS OF CATALONIA


          TO you, my friends, allow me to detail,
          The feats of monks in Catalonia's vale,
          Where oft the holy fathers pow'rs displayed,
          And showed such charity to wife and maid,
          That o'er their minds sweet fascination reigned,
          And made them think, they Paradise had gained.

          SUCH characters oft preciously advise,
          And youthful easy female minds surprise,
          The beauteous FAIR encircle with their net,
          And, of the feeling heart, possession get:
          Work in the holy vineyard, you may guess,
          And, as our tale will show, with full success.

          IN times of old, when learning 'mong the FAIR,
          Enough to read the testament, was rare,
          (Times howsoe'er thought difficult to quote,)
          A swarm of monks of gormandizing note,
          Arrived and fixed themselves within a town,
          For young and beauteous belles of great renown,
          While, of gallants, there seemed but very few,
          Though num'rous aged husbands you might view.

          A NOBLE chapel soon the fathers raised,
          To which the females ran and highly praised,
          Surveyed it o'er and confidently thought,
          'Twas there, of course, salvation should be sought.
          And when their faith had thoroughly been proved,
          To gain their point the monks the veil removed.--
          Good father Andrew scorned to use finesse,
          And in discourse the sex would thus address.

          IF any thing prevent your sov'reign bliss,
          And Paradise incautiously you miss,
          Most certainly the evil will arise,
          From keeping for your husbands large supplies,
          Of what a surplus you have clearly got,
          And more than requisite to them allot,
          Without bestowing on your trusty friends,
          The saving that to no one blessings lends.

          PERHAPS you'll tell me, marriage boons we shun;
          'Tis true, and Heav'n be praised enough is done,
          Without those duties to require our share
          You know from direful sin we guard the FAIR.
          Ingratitude 's declared the height of crimes,
          And God pronounced it such in early times;
          For this eternally was Satan curst;
          Howe'er you err, be careful of the worst.
          Return to Heav'n your thanks for bounteous care,
          And then to us a tithe of surplus spare,
          Which costs you nothing worth a moment's thought;
          And marks the zeal with which our faith is taught,
          A claim legitimate our order opes,
          Bestowed, for holy offices, by popes,
          No charitable gift, but lawful right:
          Priests well supported are a glorious sight.
          Four times a year, exactly to a day,
          Each wife this tithe should personally pay
          Our holy saint requires that you submit:
          'Tis founded on decrees of holy writ.
          All Nature carefully the law reveres,
          That gratitude and fealty endears.

          NOW marriage works we rank as an estate,
          And tithe is due for that at any rate.
          We'll take it patiently, whate'er the toil:
          Nor be o'er nice about the justful spoil.
          Our order have not, you must surely know,
          By many comforts, what we wish below.

          'TIS right, however, that I now suggest,
          Whatever passes must not be expressed;
          But naught to husbands, parents, friends, reveal;
          From ev'ry one the mysterious conceal.
          Three words th' apostle taught: be these your care;
          FAITH, CHARITY, and PRUDENCE learn to share.

          THE holy father, by his fine discourse,
          Delivered with the most impressive force,
          Gave wonderous satisfaction and surprise,
          And passed with all for Solomon the wise;
          Few slept while Andrew preached, and ev'ry wife,
          His precepts guarded as she would her life;
          And these not solely treasured in the mind,
          But showed to practise them the heart inclined,
          Each hastened tithe to bring without delay,
          And quarrelled who should be the first to pay;
          Loud murmurs rang, and many city dames,
          Were forced to keep till morn the friar's claims,
          And HOLY CHURCH, not knowing what to do,
          Such numbers seemed to be in paying cue,
          At length was forced, without restraint, to say,
          The Lord commands that, till a future day,
          You give us time to breathe:--so large the lot,
          To serve for present we enough have got;
          Too much the whole at once, but by degrees,
          Your tithe we'll take and all contrive to please.
          With us arrange the hour you would be here,
          And some to-day:--to-morrow more we'll cheer;
          The whole in order, and you'll clearly see,
          That SOFTLY with FAIRLY best agree.

          THE sex inclined to follow this advice;
          About receipts however they were not nice;
          The entertainment greatly was admired,
          And pure devotion all their bosoms fired,
          A glass of cordial some apart received;
          Good cheer was given, may be well believed;
          Ten youthful dames brisk friar Fripart took,
          Gay, airy, and engaging ev'ry look,
          Who paid with pleasure all the monk could wish;
          Some had fifteen:--some twelve to taste their dish;
          Good friar Rock had twenty for his share,
          And gave such satisfaction to the FAIR,
          That some, to show they never grudged the price,
          And proved their punctuality,--paid twice.

          So much indeed, that satiated with ways,
          That six long months engaged their nights and days:
          They gladly credit would have given now,
          But found the ladies would not this allow,
          Believing it most positively wrong,
          To keep whate'er might to the church belong.
          No tithe arrears were any where around,
          So zealous were the dames in duty found,
          They often in advance paid holy dues,
          How pure the monks!--how just the ladies views!
          The friars used despatch alone with those,
          That for their fascinating charms they chose,
          And sent the sempiternals to bestow,
          The tribute they had brought on those below,
          For in the refuse tithes that were their lot,
          The laicks oft pleasant pickings got.
          In short 'twas difficult to say,
          What charity was shown from day to day.

          IT happened that one night a married dame,
          Desirous to convey the monks their claim,
          And walking with her spouse just by the spot,
          Where dwelled the arch contrivers of the plot,
          Good Heavens! said she, I well remember now,
          I've business with a friar here, I vow;
          'Twill presently be done if you'll but wait;
          Religious duties we must ne'er abate.
          What duties? cried the husband with surprise;
          You're surely mad:--'tis midnight I surmise;
          Confess yourself to-morrow if required;
          The holy fathers are to bed retired.
          That makes no difference, the lady cried.--
          I think it does, the husband straight replied,
          And thither I'll not let you go to-night:--
          What heinous sins so terribly affright,
          That in such haste the mind you wish to ease?
          To-morrow morn repair whene'er you please:

          YOU do me wrong, rejoined the charming fair;
          I neither want confession nor a prayer,
          But anxiously desire what is due to pay;
          For if incautiously I should delay,
          Long time 'would be ere I the monk should see,
          With other matters he'll so busy be.
          But what can you the holy fathers owe?
          To which the lady said:--what don't you know?
          A tithe, my dear, the friars always claim.--
          What tithe? cried he; it surely has a name.
          Not know! astonishingly, replied the wife.--
          To which the husband answered:--On my life,
          That women friars pay is very strange;
          Will you particulars with me arrange?
          How cunningly, said she, you seem to act;
          Why clearly you're acquainted with the fact?
          'Tis Hymeneal works:--What works? cried he--
          Lord! said the dame, assuredly you see,
          Why I had paid an hour ago or more
          And you've prevented me when at the door;
          I'm sure, of those who owe, I'm not the worst,
          For I, in paying, always was the first.

          THE husband quite astonished now appeared;
          At once a hundred diff'rent ills he feared;
          But questioning his wife howe'er, he found,
          That many other dames who lived around,
          Like her; in paying tithes, the monks obeyed,
          Which consolation to his breast conveyed.
          Poor innocent! she nothing wished to hide;
          Said she, not one but tithe they make provide;
          Good friar Aubrey takes your sister's dues;
          To father Fabry Mrs. B's accrues;
          The mayoress friar William likes to greet,
          A monk more handsome scarcely you will meet;
          And I to friar Gerard always go;
          I wished this night to pay him all I owe.

          ALAS! when tongues unbridled drop disguise,
          What direful ills, what discords oft arise!
          The cunning husband having thus obtained,
          Particulars of what the fathers gained,
          At first designed in secret to disclose,
          Those scenes of fraud and matrimonial woes:
          The mayor and citizens should know, he thought;
          What dues were paid: what tithes the friars sought;
          But since 'twas rather difficult to place,
          Full credence, at the first, in such a case,
          He judged it best to make the fellow speak,
          To whom his wife had shown herself so weak.

          FOR father Gerard in the morn he sent,
          Who, unsuspecting, to the husband went,
          When, in the presence of the injured wife,
          He drew his sword and swore he'd take his life,
          Unless the mystery he would disclose,
          Which he reluctantly through terror chose.
          Then having bound the friar hand and foot,
          And in another room his lady put,
          He sallied forth his hapless lot to tell,
          And to the mayor exposed the wily spell;
          The corporation next; then up and down,
          The secret he divulged throughout the town.

          A CRY for vengeance presently was heard;
          The whole at once to slaughter, some preferred
          While others would the place with fire surround,
          And burn the house with those within it found.
          Some wished to drown them, bound within their dress;
          With various other projects you may guess;
          But all agreed that death should be their lot,
          And those for burning had most voices got.

          WITHOUT delay they to the convent flew;
          But when the holy mansion came in view,
          Respect, the place of execution changed;
          A citizen his barn for this arranged;
          The crafty crew together were confined,
          And in the blaze their wretched lives resigned,
          While round the husbands danced at sound of drum,
          And burnt whatever to their hands had come;
          Naught 'scaped their fury, monks of all degrees,
          Robes, mantles, capuchins, and mock decrees:
          All perished properly within the flames;
          But nothing more I find about the dames;
          And friar Gerard, in another place,
          Had met apart his merited disgrace.






                            THE CRADLE


          NEAR Rome, of yore, close to the Florence road,
          Was seen a humble innkeeper's abode;
          Small sums were charged; few guests the night would stay;
          And these could seldom much afford to pay.
          A pleasing active partner had the host
          Her age not much 'bove thirty at the most;
          Two children she her loving husband bore;
          The boy was one year old: the daughter more;
          Just fifteen summers o'er her form had smiled;
          In person charming, and in temper mild.

          IT happened that Pinucio, young and gay,
          A youth of family, oft passed the way,
          Admired the girl, and thought she might be gained,
          Attentions showed, and like return obtained;
          The mistress was not deaf, nor lover mute;
          Pinucio seemed the lady's taste to suit,
          Of pleasing person and engaging air;
          And 'mong the equals of our youthful fair,
          As yet, not one a pref'rence had received;
          Nor had she e'er in golden dreams believed;
          But, spite of tender years, her mind was high,
          And village lads she would not let come nigh.

          COLUTTA, (such her name,) though much admired;
          And many in the place her hand desired,
          Rejected some, and others would not take,
          And this most clearly for Pinucio's sake.
          Long conversations she could rarely get,
          And various obstacles the lovers met;
          No interviews where they might be at ease,
          But ev'ry thing conspired to fret and teaze.
          O parents, husbands! be advised by me;
          Constraint with wives or children won't agree;
          'Tis then the god of love exerts his art,
          To find admittance to the throbbing heart.

          PINUCIO and a friend, one stormy night,
          The landlord's reached and would in haste alight;
          They asked for beds, but were too late they found:
          You know, sir, cried the host, we don't abound;
          And now the very garrets we have let:
          You'd better elsewhere try your wish to get,
          And spite of weather, further on pursue
          At best, our lodging is unfit for you.

          HAVE you no truckle bed? the lover cried;
          No corner left?--we fain would here abide:
          Why, truly, said the host, we always keep
          Two beds within the chamber where we sleep;
          My wife and I, of course, take one of these;
          Together lie in t'other if you please.
          The spark replied, this we will gladly do;
          Come, supper get; that o'er, the friends withdrew:
          Pinucio, by Coletta's sage advice,
          In looking o'er the room was very nice;
          With eagle-eyes particulars he traced,
          Then 'tween the clothes himself and friend he placed.
          A camp-bed for the girl was on the floor;
          The landlord's, 'gainst the wall and next the door;
          Another opposite the last was set,
          And this, to guests, at certain times was let;
          And 'tween the two, but near the parents' best,
          A cradle for the child to rest its head,
          From which a pleasant accident arrived,
          That our gallant's young friend of rest deprived.

          WHEN midnight came, and this gay spark supposed
          The host and hostess' eyes in sleep were closed,
          Convinced the time appointed was at hand,
          To put in execution what was planned,
          He to the camp-bed silently repaired,
          And found the belle by Morpheus not insnared;
          Coletta taught a play that mortals find
          Fatigues the body more than plagues the mind:
          A truce succeeded, but 'twas quickly o'er:
          Those rest not long who pilfer Cupid's store.

          AGAIN, when to the room the hostess came,
          And found the cradle rested not the same,
          Good heav'ns! cried she, it joins my husband's head:
          And, but for that, I truly had been led
          To lay myself unthinkingly beside
          The strangers whom with lodging we provide;
          But, God be praised, this cradle shows the place
          Where my good husband's pillow I must trace.
          This said, she with the friend was quickly laid,
          Without suspecting what mistake she'd made.

          BETWEEN the lovers all was blithe and gay,
          When suddenly the friend, though far from day,
          Was forced to rise ('twas plain a pressing case,)
          And move the infant's cradle from its place,
          To ope the door, and lest he noise might make,
          Or any way by chance the child should wake,
          He set it carefully beside his bed,
          And (softly treading) to the garden sped.

          ON his return he passed the cradle by;
          To place it as before he would not try,
          But went to sleep; when presently a sound,
          From something that had tumbled, rang around,
          Awoke his wife, who ran below,
          That what had happened she might clearly know.
          No fool in such adventures was our Wight:
          The opportunity he would not slight,
          But played the husband well: no, no, I'm wrong;
          He played it ill:--too oft, too much, too long;
          For whosoe'er would wish to do it well,
          Should softly go:--the gentle most excel.

          IN truth, the wife was quite surprised to find
          Her spouse so much to frolicking inclined;
          Said she, what ails the man, he's grown so gay?
          A lad of twenty's not more fond of play.
          Well! let's enjoy the moments while we can;
          God's will be done, since life is but a span!

          THE words were scarcely said, when our gallant
          Renewed his fun, and nothing seemed to want;
          Indeed, the hostess still her charms possessed,
          And, on occasion, well might be caressed.

          MEANWHILE Coletta, dreading a surprise,
          Prevailed upon her paramour to rise;
          'Twas nearly break of day when he withdrew,
          But, groping to his place the way anew,
          Pinucio, by the cradle too, was led
          To miss his friend's and take the landlord's bed.
          No sooner in than with an under voice,
          (Intriguers oft too eagerly rejoice,)
          Said he, my friend, I wish I could relate
          The pleasure I've received; my bliss is great;
          To you, I'm sorry, Fortune proves so cold;
          Like happiness I'd fain in you behold;
          Coletta is a morsel for a king;
          Inestimable girl!--to me she'll cling.
          I've many seen, but such a charming fair,
          There's not another like her any where.

          WITH softest skin, delightful form and mien;
          Her ev'ry act resembles BEAUTY's queen;
          In short, before we'd ended with our fun,
          Six posts (without a fiction) we had run.
          The host was struck with what the spark averred,
          And muttered something indistinctly heard.

          THE hostess whispered HIM she thought her spouse:--
          Again, my dear, such sparks let's never house;
          Pray don't you hear how they together chat?--
          Just then the husband raised himself and sat;
          Is this your plan? said he with mighty rage;
          Was it for THIS you would my house engage?
          You understand me, but I'll seek redress;
          Think you so very cheap to have success?
          What, would you ruin families at will,
          And with our daughters take at ease your fill?
          Away, I say! my house this moment quit;
          And as for You, abominable chit,
          I'll have your life: this hour you breathe your last;
          Such creatures only can with beasts be classed.

          PINUCIO heard the lecture with dismay,
          At once was mute, and grew as cold as clay;
          A moment's silence through the room prevailed;
          Coletta trembled, and her lot bewailed.
          The hostess now, on ev'ry side perceived
          Her peril great, and for the error grieved.
          The friend, howe'er, the cradle called to mind,
          Which caused the many ills we've seen combined,
          And instantly he cried:--Pinucio! strange
          You thus allow yourself about to range;
          Did I not tell you when the wine you took,
          'Twould make many sad misfortunes hook?
          Whene'er you freely drink, 'tis known fall well,
          Your sleep's disturbed, you walk, and nonsense tell.
          Come, come to bed: the morning soon will peep;
          Pinucio took the hint, pretended sleep,
          And carried on so artfully the wile,
          The husband no suspicion had of guile.
          The stratagem our hostess likewise tried,
          And to her daughter's bed in silence hied,
          Where she conceived her fortress was so strong,
          She presently began to use her tongue,
          And cried aloud:--Impossible the fact;
          Such things he could not with Coletta act;
          I've with her been in bed throughout the night,
          And she, no more than I, has swerved from right;
          'Twere mighty pretty, truly, here to come;
          At this the host a little while was dumb;
          But in a lower tone at length replied
          I nought with your account I'm satisfied.

          THE party rose; the titter circled round;
          And each sufficient reason for it found;
          The whole was secret, and whoe'er had gained,
          With care upon the subject mute remained.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS OF J. DE LA FONTAINE — VOLUME 12 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


